Silence all stand.
The high court of Australia is now in session.
God save the king. Please be seated.
Call the matter for hearing please.
AA and the trustees of the Roman Catholic Church
for the Diocese of Maitland, Newcastle,
ABN 7 9 4 6 9 3 4 3 0 5 4.
Your honor's, I appear with Mr. McCamish and Mr.
Tierney for the appellate. Thank you.
Mr. Herzel. May please court appear with Mr.
Sheer of Senior Council, Ms. Robertson and Ms.
Bristow for the respondent.
Yes. Thank you, Mr. Gleason. Mr. Hertz.
Uh, thank you, your Honor. May we structure our oral
submissions in this way?
Uh, I'll deal first with the question
of whether the diocese,
and I'll come back to that word, uh, owed a relevant duty
of care to the appellant.
I'll then deal with the question of whether, if, so
that was a nondelegable duty
and whether that can be breached
by intentional conduct, uh, Mr.
McCamish will then deal with the notice of contention.
Uh, as I go, I will at appropriate points, locate
my submissions by reference to the disputed facts document,
which was, uh, filed on the 1st of August.
And I will also, as I go, deal with the respondent's status
of facts document filed on the 5th of August.
Um, starting with the duty of care.
May we emphasize at once the significant effect
of the Civil Liability Act on that question.
Would your honors take that up please?
If your honor's turn in the Civil Liability Act
to Section six, capital I,
your honors will see the objects of Division four
of the relevant part.
And in Section six J may we draw attention
to the definitions of child abuse, proceedings,
legal personality,
and then unincorporated organization.
Your honors will see that Section six, capital K, uh,
allows child abuse proceedings to be commenced
or continued against an unincorporated organization.
And as I'll show your honors in a moment,
that provision ultimately wasn't needed here.
Section six, capital L permits an unincorporated
organization to appoint an entity as a proper defendant.
And again, as I'll show your honors in a moment
that is in substance, uh, what appears
to have happened here, turning over
to Section six, capital ed.
And that empowers the court to appoint a proper defendant,
uh, if one isn't otherwise appointed,
and that wasn't required here.
And then Section six, capital O
is a most substantive provision.
Your honors will see that by paragraph A,
the proper defendant is taken to be the defendant on behalf
of the unincorporated organization.
And then paragraph B makes it clear two things
that anything done
by the unincorporated organization is deemed
to have been done by the proper defendant.
And importantly, that a duty
or obligation of the unincorporated organization in relation
to the proceedings is taken to be a duty owed
by the proper defendant.
And your honors will notice that both paragraph A
and B assume that acts can be done
and duties can be owed by the unincorporated organization.
And that, uh, is then given, uh, effect
by paragraph D.
A court may make substantive findings in the child abuse
proceedings against an unincorporated association
as if the organization had legal personality.
And then paragraph E, uh, again, assumes
that, uh, or proceeds on the basis
that if the unincorporated organization
had legal personality,
which this provision effectively deems it to have, uh,
and would've incurred a liability, that liability is
to be born by the proper defendant,
Mr. Hertz, with
b anything done?
Mate, you may be coming to this.
How is something done by the unincorporated organization?
Is it done by those legal entities that are identified
as the constituent members? Is that what
Well, um, your Honor, um,
asks a question, the answer to which is not entirely clear,
um, but it, it is to be effectively, uh,
treated in the same way
as if the unincorporated organi organization itself had a
legal existence.
And so any way in which a legal entity could be said
to have done something that is by individuals
or other legal entities, uh,
is a way in which an unincorporated organization can
for the purposes of this, uh, set
of provisions be taken to do something.
Right. The well, perhaps in this case, who, uh, do is,
my understanding is on your case,
and tell me if I'm jumping ahead,
is whether the unincorporated organization included
the bishop, and I'll call 'em the trustees.
The trustees are not relevant to our case, right?
The Bishop Yes.
And the priests Yes.
Including Father Picken? Yes.
So anything done by the unincorporated
by Father Picken was on your case done
by the unincorporated We
Agent. Um, we don't
put it quite that, uh, highly, that's why we,
uh, need the Nondelegable duty.
I see. Um, aspect, but I will, I will come to that.
Is, is that because the people you've identified other
than Father Picken are ones with authority?
Yes. Thank you.
Um, would your honors then turn to the appellants book
of further materials, please?
Uh, in volume one,
and at page 11,
your honors will see the amended statement of claim.
And your Honor, will, your honors will see
that the name defendant, uh, was the trustees.
If your honors turn over to page 12,
under the heading the defendant,
your honors will see in paragraph five that it was alleged
that the defendant, that is the trustees is a proper
defendant to the claim, which relates to the diocese there
for the purposes of the relevant part.
And so that identifies the unincorporated organization in
question as the diocese of the Roman Catholic Church
for Maitland, Newcastle.
And it identifies the proper defendant for
that unincorporated association.
Um, the numbering of the next paragraphs is a little, um,
confused, but jumping over the, uh, paragraphs three
and four, there's then another paragraph five, which alleges
that at all material times the diocese was a diocese
of the Roman Catholic Church.
If your honors then turn to page 72 in this volume,
your honors will see the defense.
And if your honors turn to page 74, um,
your honors will see in the third paragraph on that page,
paragraph five is admitted.
That was the first paragraph five.
And then your honors will see that in paragraph eight.
The second paragraph five in the statement
of claim was also admitted.
The, the effect of those pleadings when read against the
background of Section six capital O, is
that it was common ground that the diocese
of the Roman Catholic Church for Maitland, Newcastle,
which within the church structure is a separate diocese, was
to be treated for the purposes of making findings a fact
and legal obligation as if it were a separate legal entity.
And it's for that reason
that there is no difficulty in posing the question whether
the diocese owed a duty of care.
And the facts agreed between the parties, uh,
at trial indeed gave greater precision to the context, uh,
concept of the diocese.
Would your honors turn to those agreed facts at page 79?
Please?
Just so I get Mr.
Hertzfeld, and I think this was reflected in Justice LE's
judgment, the initial references
to the diocese is the geographic area of the
what's broadly known as the Catholic Church.
Is that right? And then that became the,
and then the idea is that's the organization, is that right?
Um, your Honor says the initial references,
I think the first reference is in paragraph five, uh, yes.
Which is actually to the organizational structure
within the church
Of the church within that area.
Yes. Yes. But your, your Honor is right that, um,
at some other times, diocese is used unsurprisingly
to mean also a geographic area. Um,
Sorry. In,
in on page 79, uh, is the list of matters
and facts in issue from trial.
And if your honor's turnover to, um, page 80,
your honors will see paragraph 17
and 18, which were matters in facts,
not in issue, in other words.
Agreed. Uh, matters.
And so we, uh, agree
in the respondent's status of facts, document we agree
with points one to three of that document
Care and control of Catholic churches mean, does that mean
maintenance of the churches?
Um, y uh, your Honor, um,
there was some further evidence about that.
I, I don't want to, uh, gloss what was agreed at this point,
but I will come back to your honor's question.
Are you rely upon that of essentially
for attribution purposes that the bishop is in the position
of a controlling mind or a person whose conduct
and knowledge can be attributed to the diocese?
Yes. And that aspect of attribution we don't
think is in controversy.
Some other aspects
of attribution are in controversy, and I'll come to those.
So in relation to the duty of care at issue here,
would your honors turn back to the statement of claim,
please, at page 15 of this volume,
Are you coming Back to the Civil
Liability Act at any stage?
Uh, I think I, um, yes, I will,
but towards the end of my submissions,
You'll, you'll deal with Justice LE's reference
to section, um, six F.
I will, yes. Thank you.
So page 15 of the, uh, book,
your honors will see that the duty
of care was pleaded in paragraph 33,
and the duty was pleaded in rather, um, general terms,
The respondent conceded, for instance, that the diocese
as the occupier of the premises of the presbytery, uh,
at which the abuse occurred, would owe, uh,
the usual occupier's duty that is to take reasonable care
to avoid causing reasonably foreseeable harm, uh,
to those on the premises as a result
of the state of the premises.
Um, but if one reads the particulars to paragraph 34,
uh, and then the pleading in paragraph 35,
particularly in light of the facts of the case, uh, the duty
of care at issue here, or,
or perhaps rather more precisely the scope of the duty
of care at issue here, is rather more focused.
It's whether the diocese owed a duty to take reasonable care
to avoid reasonably foreseeable personal injury
to children invited onto diocesan premises caused
by the conduct of diocesan priests at those premises.
And by invited, I mean invited by a person
to whom the diocese had given control of those premises,
or put another way whom the diocese had authorized
or armed to invite people onto those
premises. And of course, so that
I just ask that duty you've just outlined is, is
that your summation of 33 to 35?
It is a a
and if I may put it generally,
the way the case was conducted
and what was an issue in the case, thank you.
And I, I've sought to articulate it precisely,
particularly given observations in a number of cases
by this court of the need for a duty of care
to be framed at a sufficiently precise, uh, level. But
You don't frame it at a level of a duty
to prevent harm from sexual assault?
No, you put it higher than that.
I, I put it so more Abstract than that,
In some ways, more abstractly,
and in some ways more precisely,
because I've referred to additional elements.
I see. But,
but what Your Honor says is correct
that the sexual assault was in fact the conduct at issue
here, but no, that is not, um,
the way in which I've articulated the
Defining character of the scope of the duty. Yes,
Yes. The,
the, these
Paragraphs of the pleading are kind
of contradictory in a way,
because either the duty of care is a duty
to take reasonable care,
or it's a duty to ensure that reasonable care is taken.
It it can't be both.
Um, it, it can be argued.
The way that it's pleaded, your Honor, is right.
It is contradictory.
EE everybody running the case now, and I say now,
because of the way the trial was conducted, understands
that the way that we put it is,
firstly there was a duty of care.
We have to get to that hurdle.
We accept the force of what the respondents put on
that point, but we then say, in addition, it was
of a nondelegable kind.
And if that is right, then your honor's articulation, uh,
is with respect to correct.
I'm gonna address duty of care,
and then I'll come back to the Nondelegable duty.
Um, now the Court of Appeal rejected any such duty.
So may we explain, uh,
the features which we submit support it,
and in the course of doing so,
why the Court of Appeal earned,
Sorry, Mr.
Could you just, uh, repeat slowly
that the way you formulate that duty,
I, I wondered if we should have written it down.
And the answer is yes. I
I think I'd be grateful if he could be
provided, um, sooner rather than later.
So we can actually see the way in which
you summarize those paragraphs.
Yes. Because I think the issue that arises is that put
to you by Justice Edelman, there's a confusion.
I think if we're dealing with Nondelegable duty,
then in a sense, what you're starting
with may be interesting, but irrelevant in the sense
that we're asking whether
or not there's been an entrustment of someone on the basis
that, that they must ensure care is taken Yes.
As distinct from a set of facts, which give rise to a duty
of care is arising out of a special relationship,
whether it's got knowledge attached to it or not. Yes.
I I'm going to address both. Um, and
So what are we dealing with now?
Just an ordinary duty of care, which I'll, I'll say again,
but we will reduce it to writing.
Um, whether the diocese owed a duty to take reasonable care
to avoid reasonably foreseeable personal injury
to children invited onto diocesan premises caused
by the conduct of diocesan priests at those premises.
And I think you also included and had authority to invite,
Uh, so by invited, yeah.
I couldn't put too much into the one sentence.
By invited, I mean invited by a person
to whom the diocese had given control of the premises, uh,
or put another way whom the diocese had authorized
or armed to invite people onto the premises.
You, you really must
Put it in writing and give it to us.
Yes. At, uh, morning tea. We, we, we will do that.
Um, so can I start? Sorry, I'm so sorry. No, no.
Um, now it was an agreed fact at trial
that Father Picken was the parish priest of St.
Patrick's Church.
Um, your honors can see that in pa on page 80 of the,
uh, book of further materials
Admitted on the pleadings before we
Get to trial, was it, it it was admitted on the pleadings
and it was reflected in these agreed facts.
And, uh, your honors, we'll see on page 80,
paragraph 19, at all material times,
father Picken was an incarnated priest in the diocese.
And that is the proposition in 0.5
of the respondent's status of facts document.
But then your honors will also notice paragraph 20
of all material, uh, the bishop appointed Father Picken
as the parish priest of St.
Patrick's Church. Now, the significance of that fact
for present purposes is
that the case was conducted on the basis
that Father Picken had the authority of the diocese
to decide who was invited to the presbytery
and what events could take place there,
because that was part of the authority
of a parish priest. You,
You don't say that the court,
or at least the court of the was bound by that paragraph.
A, A-A-A-A-A judge can disagree,
A trial judge can, the Court
of appeal couldn't. I'll come back to that.
And when you do, would you also, if it's possible,
identify the error in the factual reasoning
of Justice Leming in concluding
that he was only an assistant
Priest? I, I'm not going
to seek to do so. Okay.
Alright. Thank you. Y your argument is
his honor just shouldn't
Have gone there. Yes.
And so, just so I'm clear,
there's an omission on the pleadings
that he's a parish priest.
You can see that by paragraph five, numbered the third time.
Yes. Admitted on page 75 of the book
of Further materials Yes.
Is then a document provided to the trial judge,
which says it's an agreed
Fact. And as I'll
show you, your Honor, is that document was
provided on day three of the trial
after all of the evidence, uh, oral evidence.
Thank you. And then there's a finding by the trial judge
in a sense, relying on those facts
because no other evidence was aduc otherwise.
Yes. Paragraph one. Thank you.
Um, but the significance
for our purposes isn't so much the title.
It was what influence
that had on the way the case was conducted,
and in particular, what influence it had as to the findings
to be made about the authority of Father Picken to decide
who was invited to the presbytery
and what could take place there.
Would your honors, please, in this volume go
to the expert report of Father Dylan?
Starting at page 4, 3 8.
Um, father Dylan's evidence
after there was a challenge to its admissibility
resolved favorably to the appellant
by the, by the trial judge.
His evidence wasn't challenged in any way
in cross-examination.
Uh, and it wasn't challenged in the court of appeal.
What could be made of it was the subject of submissions,
but the correctness of it was not the subject of challenge.
Um, would your honors on page 4 3 9, uh,
look firstly at, uh, paragraph at question C
and then, uh, the answer to that, which is framed
by reference to the parish priest in Australia in 1969.
The parish priest was the highest local authority
for members of the Catholic church
and answerable only to the diocesan bishop.
And then it led us you to the no question the priest.
It's a reference to the parish priest was the center
and focus of what we might today call the governance
of the parish at its local level.
If your honors then turn to the second report
of Father Dylan, starting on page 4, 4, 5,
On page 4, 4 6 at letters I
to n your honors will see.
He gave evidence about the bishop of the diocese,
the ultimate authority with regard to the use
and administration of all properties in the diocese.
And this is the beginning of the answer to your honor,
justice Gleason's question about property.
Excuse me. Property can't be sold without his permission,
nor can it be used for any purpose in any way contrary
to the wishes or directions of the bishops.
That's the bishop. But then your honors will see in,
in letters K to MN for those activities
and uses directly part of the church's mission.
The parish priest's authorization
and permission would normally be sufficient,
placing a new building would need bishop's permission.
And should the bishop disapprove of any use
of parish property for which a parish priest had given
permission, the bishop could
and usually would prohibit the use of that property
For Activities and uses
that are directly part of the church's
Mission. Yes.
And if your honors turn back to page 4, 4 7,
there's then specific evidence about, uh, the use
of presbyteries from E two P
purposes, other than solely the priest's residence
parish offices and administrative headquarters
with constant visits,
but then also meeting rooms, kitchen facilities
for committee meetings, social gatherings,
religious instructions, et cetera, indispensable components
of the priest fulfilling both his pastoral
and administrative responsibilities.
And then, uh, particularly at, uh,
O to P for the priest.
The presbytery wasn't just where he lived, it was
where he worked in order to undertake the spiritual pastor
of administrative responsibilities.
Would your honors then take up volume two of the book
of further of the appellant's book of further materials?
Are there findings of the primary judge
in relation to these, this evidence?
Yes. Why are we going to this?
Because, in a sense,
because these findings are part
of the respondent's challenge, uh, in this court.
And so, um, these matters,
and so I need to take your honors to the evidence.
Do we, do we have the pleaded canon law
and other directions
that are pleaded in the amended statement of claim?
I don't understand your honor's question.
I don't think they've been included in the bundle.
Um, father Dylan's first report extracts some parts of them.
Uh, we can see if we can supply them to your
Honor's. It's just that, uh,
some of them are admitted.
Well, it's admitted that they apply it is just
that they rely on the whole of it, et cetera.
I think it might be useful to have those
Things. Yes. Um, I don't
think we've included
them in the bundle, but we will,
Especially because two one two's been specifically
Yes, we will, we will.
Okay. Um, attend to that homework task also.
But were they attended separately?
I, I think so, but, um, Oh, well, it
Only, I'm, I'm so sorry.
I'm, I'm told that they, they weren't
actually tended, oh, sorry.
I assume they were tended. I, they were, I, I, I had,
I had two, but, um,
and I don't think they're matters of law.
So in any event, I won't delay
This. I had assumed they were before the
people.
Can I, but you've got extracts of them in the report.
We do. And That report was tendered.
It was. And so just to, just, that's
Enough. If they weren't tendered, I
don't,
and the accuracy of that report wasn't challenged.
It, it wasn't, um,
but I will make sure I find out the correct
answer to all of those matters.
Sure. Um, just to go back
to volume two, uh, if your honors turn
to page 5 6 0, this is part
of Father Dylan's cross-examination.
And at lines 25, uh,
to 47, your honors will see
that Father Dylan gave evidence of the, um,
social gatherings that could take place, that a lot
of it depended on the attitude of the priest,
particularly the parish priest because it was his home.
And so some would have a private approach
and some would have a more open approach.
And then at, uh, pages 30, at lines 35 to 47,
some examples were given of, um, the kinds of, uh,
activities that could take place.
And if your honors then turn to page 5 6 2,
at lines 24 to 35, he was asked about rules
or stipulations as to the use of presbyteries.
And he said there might have been one or two,
but, um, at line 30, all these things were left
to the common sense and good judgment of the parish priest
with the parish priest who had say over what events,
meetings, gatherings would happen. And so
How was this evidence characterized?
Was it led as opinion evidence,
or was it lay evidence of someone
who was a priest at the time?
It was characterized as opinion evidence based on his
experience, which included being, uh, a par being,
being a priest over a very long period.
But these are not really opinions.
These are direct observations of what he remembers,
Um, that that may be so,
although, um, that would then only be observations
of what he remembered.
He was qualified to give opinions,
which were then more generally applicable.
Okay. In any event,
this was the, this was the evidence.
And what's significant to the existence of a duty of care,
as I said, is not then so much the title parish priest.
It's that Father Pickens being agreed to hold
that position carried with it, the fact that subject
to the bishop's direction, he was given
by the diocese control over the premises of the presbytery
who was invited to it, and what activities took place there.
And you, your honors will notice from that evidence that,
um, what the priest could permissibly authorize to occur.
There wasn't limited to,
if I can put this in very large quotes, church events, um,
in the sense of religious events or events
or authorized by someone other than the priest.
It included effectively all of the social gatherings
that the priest decided, uh, were suitable subject
to prohibition by the bishop.
And that then qualifies a point in the res in the
respondent's status of facts document.
If your honors would look at paragraph 32
of the respondent's status of facts, document
Y Your honors will see the fact
asserted in paragraph 32 is
that the gatherings at the presbytery were not
church events.
And, um, that notion
of church events is a rather, um, imprecise one.
Um, the imprecision of that was evidently recognized
by the trial judge.
Uh, because where do
These facts in the first column come from?
Did they come from your submissions?
Um, n no, the the grade ones are ones that are covered
by the disputed facts document.
How's that necessarily grade? You mean the bolded ones?
Yes. Uh, they, I think they should be grade.
That is, that is regrettable for the respondent.
Um, but, um, the ones that say this is a disputed factor,
obviously the disputed facts, but,
But just to take 32, yes.
That sentence is that sentence replicating something
that's said somewhere else in, in a judgment.
So what the respondent says about it is the primary
judge accepted the submission.
The Friday evenings were not church events.
That's in the second column.
Um, if your honors take up the core appeal book, please,
at page 49,
your honors will see at page 49
at page 49, paragraph 190.
It, it is said the diocese, the diocese case was.
So this paragraph is a summary of the case.
And in the second sentence,
nor were the Friday evenings at the presbytery church
events, and the primary judge puts that in, uh, quotes.
The other paragraph in the primary judge's reasons
to which the respondent refers is paragraph 218.
If your honor's turn to that, this is part
of the primary judge's reasons about
vicarious liability being established.
What was that paragraph Again? Two 18.
And part of her honor's reasoning as to the establishment
of vicarious liability was the special role which the
diocese gave Father Picken.
And then in the last sentence
that the Friday nights he arranged were not, quote,
church events, does not preclude the diocese
vicarious liability.
And so the respondent, in their status
of facts document in the left hand column, asserts a series
of facts I'm identifying as I go along,
those which are agreed,
but this one needs to be substantially qualified
because of the imprecision in the notion which the primary
judge evidently recognized by use of her quote marks
in the language of church events.
And that imprecision is
because of the evidence of Father Dylan, about
what the parish priest was authorized
to do at the presbytery. But
The finding wasn't gatherings general, isn't it?
The finding limited to what
that the Friday nights he arranged were not church events.
It, it was, um, and, uh, that is so,
but what I'm picking up is the, um, whole notion
of church events carries with it, uh,
an extremely imprecise ambit was, was that
language used in a submission?
Where, where does it come from? I think it's from the
respondent's, uh, submissions.
But you are not saying
that these Friday night events were,
were church events, whatever that means.
You are not propounding a concept of church events.
NN no, but in a sense,
the question question was sexual abuse
of children an authorized church thing to do?
Of course not. But that's
as I'm gonna come on the wrong question.
One has to look at the more general milieu.
And the point that I'm making is
that having social functions, uh, at the presbytery
with people, the, uh, parish priest chose
to invite was something that was part of
what he was authorized to do by the diocese.
And so the notion of saying this was not a church event, um,
rather conceals a degree of factual information relevant
to the question of a duty of care.
Ultimately, we're much more concerned here
with the relationship between the diocese
and the plaintiff, then with the scope of the, the authority
of the, um, the priest.
Yes. But the parish priest,
which Father Picken had been agree, was agreed to be,
had authority of the kind that I've mentioned.
And that is, um, something that informs the first
aspect of why we say a duty was of care was owed
by the diocese because of
what it armed the parish priest to do.
Um, so this is not a case like Modbury, for example,
uh, where there are the actions of a third party who happens
to be on, uh, the defendant's property
and there injures the plaintiff.
Um, it, it's not a case
to adopt the language in Modbury at paragraph 19
where the diocese had no control over the behavior
of diocesan priests
or where such priests were strangers to the parties.
Um, now just staying with the respondent's facts
document, we agree with
what is said in par in point 33.
This is, again, referable to the Friday evening gatherings,
and we agree that they were not for the purpose
of religious instruction, but the same is.
So for many of the events
that might take place at the presbytery at the decision
of the parish priest.
Now, it was pointed out in the hearing in the Court
of Appeal that there are documents, a number of them
that indicate that Father Picken was in fact an assistant
priest under a Father Oyer.
But the position that procedural fairness
requires be adopted was conceded in the Court of Appeal.
Uh, by then, uh, counsel for, uh, the respondent here,
would your honors take up the respondent's book
of further materials, please?
I'm sorry, Mr. Um, Hertz,
could you just gimme that reference again?
Yes. It's the respondent's book
of further materials at page one 90
and, um, at one 90 line 18,
justice Leming, who had raised the, uh,
factual issue by this time in reply, Mr.
Sheller's reply, uh, identified
that there were pleadings
and admissions that the parish priest,
that Father Picken was a parish priest.
And that explains, he said,
why There's no evidence on the point.
And Mr. Sheller said, we are stuck with the admission.
And then Justice Leming said he understood
how the litigation should be determined, uh,
And it included that Father Picken was the parish priest
and lived alone in the presbytery at the relevant time.
And the response, there was no evidence
of anyone else living at the presbytery, whether that's
because of the passing or time of what have you,
that wasn't established, but we're stuck with the admission,
uh, we made.
And so notice that, uh, what was conceded was not only
that there were no other adults present
during the gatherings at the presbytery.
That's the point in the respondents, uh, status
of facts document at 0.34.
There were no other adults present
during the gatherings at the presbytery.
We agree. But as is apparent, Mr.
Mr. Hirschfield, Mr. Sheer may have been stuck.
Why was the Court of Appeal
For the same reason? Um, the reason
The breadth of Section 75 a of the Supreme Court Act,
The, the reason one cannot as a party
raise a new matter on appeal, which could have been met
by evidence below is
procedural fairness. And that isn't, that is
That submission that was made. Did,
did I,
I dunno whether you appeared below, but I didn't. No,
But, but Justice Lemming himself, um,
accepted the point appears to be good.
And Justice Leming himself was accepting that
that was the basis upon which the court ought to proceed
as a matter of procedural fairness, because
otherwise one has this position, the respondent
or the appellant can't raise an issue,
but the court, absent anyone being able to raise the issue,
can itself determine the case on the manner that was, uh,
could have been met by evidence below.
It's a breach of procedural fairness, one
of your grounds in your notice of appeal.
We don't need that because we simply say the Court
of Appeal was wrong in the outcome for deciding the cases.
I'll show you, your Honor, in a moment.
Not on the basis that was the agreed position
between the parties, whether that was a denial
of procedural fairness, uh, I is, uh, a step
to the ultimate conclusion, which is they were wrong to,
To do it. Just so I'm clear,
leaving aside procedural fairness point,
which I understand you don't deny
that the court had the power
to find its own facts under Section 75 A
As a general matter, of course not. Righto.
Thank you. So just to be clear though, Mr.
So we're, we're all getting procedural fairness, as far
as I'm concerned, is very clear.
These issues are defined by pleadings,
and it's not just amount of procedural fairness,
it's the scope of what their fundamental function is.
Yes. So That's why I took you back earlier.
I mean, you start with the agreed statement of facts,
but the pleadings pleaded it and it was admitted.
Um,
I, I'm not disagreeing with any of that.
There's a whole series of problems of what occurred.
But if, uh, if there had been, um,
no possibility that the matter could have been,
could have affected the evidence below,
there is at least power in the court of appeal if necessary,
even to grant an amendment of pleadings
and leave to withdraw an admission.
But none of that could possibly occur here
because of the way that the matter was conducted,
as was conceded.
Um, so what, as I say is the significant point out
of this is not so much the title.
The significant point is that in the context
of an agreed position, pleaded admitted agreed facts
in the context that Father Picken was the parish priest.
There was no evidence or even suggestion
that there was anyone else living at the presbytery. Um,
You referred to an agreed fact, maybe paragraph 34,
that he was alone. I'm trying to find
That. Yes. So in the respondent's
status of facts document,
I'll state a fact in this court,
Not the agreed facts in this court. Right.
Um, um, it, it was said
that there were no other adults present
during the gatherings.
And, and that is true.
No, but I'm making a, a, a slightly more fundamental point,
which is about no one else living there, and
therefore no one else having the authority,
which the evidence showed that a parish priest could have.
And had that been an issue, which was in issue at trial, um,
the suggestion that there was another priest
who was living there who was more senior than Father Picken,
um, then that matter would've had to be thoroughly explored.
Um, and that not having done the position is as Mr.
Sheer, um, conceded it in the court below.
And to be clear, um,
while the title may have been incorrect,
it's not at all clear that the substantial fact
that Father Picken lived alone at the presbytery
and had control of it was incorrect.
It was entirely possible that Father O'Dwyer, who was,
it appears the parish priest didn't live there,
and that Father Picken lived there
alone as the assistant priest.
Can you just remind me, was there a finding of fact
by the trial judge that he lived alone?
Uh, I think the answer is yes. Yes.
According to Well, no, found
that there were no other adults when the assaults occurred.
That's PJ 85 according to that, that's different to the,
I I I accept that.
Yes. The, the, um, uh, uh, your Honor,
we'll see at paragraph,
uh, yes.
Um, your Honor, we'll see at paragraph 68
Of the primary Judge of the primary judge's reasons,
this is in dealing with the, um,
Uh, uh,
One of the evidentiary objections your honors
will see in dealing with it.
The primary judge said, in this case,
the disputed evidence Concerned Uncharged Act, uh, acts
and so on, but also surrounding,
including having repeatedly invited him
and Mr. Perry Prairie to the
presbytery where he lived alone.
Thank you. So the primary judge was proceeding, um, uh,
unsurprisingly on the, uh, basis consistent
with the fact that he was the parish priest, consistent
with the fact that there was no suggestion anyone else was
living there, that he did live alone
and exercised all the power
Is one of those findings which Justice
Leming disagreed with from memory.
Uh, yes.
Justice Leming, and I'll show your honors this,
this is the whole point of what I'm going through.
Um, uh, your honors will see also at paragraph 1 37. I was
Gonna say the third bullet point
is, is there's an agreement,
Uh, that's an agreement between the evidence of Mr. Perry
and the appellant.
And in the third bullet point, it was clear
that their evidence was in agreement
that Father Picken lived alone. Sorry,
Who's that agreement of again?
Um, the appellant and Mr. Perry. Thank
You.
Your honors will see that in the previous paragraph.
And so that's why I say that even if the title was wrong,
the substantial fact may well have been correct,
because the two parties
who gave most direct evidence about the matter,
the appellant and Mr. Perry, uh, gave evidence
that he lived alone.
And it wasn't suggested to anyone that he didn't, and
So, don't, don't, don't the primary facts support your
proposition that whether he was a parish
priest or assistant priest.
The fact is he did invite them into the presbytery,
and no one seemed to have objected to it.
But I'm going a little bit further than that, which is
that, um, the way the trial was conducted
and the evidence showed that that was part of his function,
not to invite people to sexually abuse them,
but to control the activities
and people at the presbytery. Do
You alarm paragraph 2, 2 8
of the primary judge in court appeal book 59?
We, we do, we do Actually the last sentence
We do, and, and this is one of the findings
that the primary that, that the Court of Appeal criticized.
So let me take your honors to that immediately.
Now, would your honors turn in the core appeal book
to page 1 9 1?
Uh, if your honors actually started page 1, 9 0,
your honors will see in paragraph 2 0 1 of the court
of appeals, uh, reasons.
There's a quote from the primary judge's reasons,
including the paragraph to which, your Honor,
justice Gordon has directed my attention.
And, um, your honors will see that in paragraph 2 0 3,
justice Leming identified that that paragraph to which,
your Honor, justice Gordon has directed attention,
presuppose wrongly that Father Picken was a parish priest
who lived alone in the presbytery without
other adults present.
So can we just break that up for the moment?
Um, wrongly that he was a parish priest
who lived alone in the presbytery.
So there's a number of facts there
that are the subject of challenge.
Do you read that as challenging every each
and every one of those facts?
Yes. And your honors will see that in the next, um,
justice Leming was challenging each
Respect. Oh, sorry. I meant to say that.
Yes. Um, your honors will see that in paragraph 2 0 4,
his honor said the reasoning of the primary judge,
if it were based on facts, would not be without force.
And then your honors will see dropping down halfway
through that paragraph.
But Father Picken was an assistant priest sharing a
presbytery with Father Oyer pp parish priest
in suburban Newcastle.
And insofar as the primary judge gave emphasis
to the sole power to control
who entered Father Pickin's accommodation,
that was effectively wrong.
That that reasoning is, um,
impermissibly both procedurally,
but also substantively, substantively,
because it assumes the incorrectness in the proposition
that Father Picken lived alone absent any evidence.
So what I've said so far, then tracking back
to the disputed facts document in this court that deals
with our oral submissions on items one to four
of the disputed facts, documents,
not the respondent's status of facts document,
that's their document.
The disputed facts document is an agreed document which
catalogs the disputed facts in this court.
And what I have said, deals orally with matters,
with items one to four of the disputed facts. Document
Those facts.
I'm wondering how, um, precisely
how they are relevant to the relationship between the
diocese and the plaintiff.
Yes. Is there, was there a finding, for example,
that the diocese held out or offered or,
or made, um, the presbytery available as a place
of sanctuary for parishioners?
Um, not in those terms.
The way they're relevant, I is in the way
that's really reflected in paragraph 2, 2, 8
of the primary judge's, uh, reasons that is
that the diocese, um, authorized let father
Pick, let father Picken do whatever he wanted
to in the, in the presbytery,
Um, in broad terms, yes. And,
And that is said to give rise
to something about the relationship
between the diocese and the plaintiff.
Yes. That's the first point that I'm relying on
for the duty to demonstrate that this is not a case of
the priest at some other location completely unconnected
with the diocese, um, abusing someone.
This is as part of, uh, at the premises
that he was authorized to occupy control
and invite people to, for the effectively for the functions
that he deemed were appropriate. You, you
Have to go a lot further than that.
I mean, that, that, that's just a landlord relationship.
So as I said, I've just started.
So, um, that's point, that's point number one about duty.
Um, the next point, uh, the next point, uh,
to the role, which the next point which we point to
is the role which the diocese
and the church more generally required priests,
not merely parish priests,
but priests to perform in connection with children.
So would your honors again turn
to Father Dylan's first report in the appellant's book
of further materials?
Volume one. And would your
honors turn to page four?
Uh, 40.
Uh, your honors will see in question D,
it extracts a, um, papal ordinance.
And may we draw attention particularly to, um, paragraph B
of that ordinance.
And then the answer, which was given underneath was
that the responsibilities
of priests on all those paragraphs were consistent
with normal and traditional practice of, uh, the church.
Would your honors then turn over to page 4, 4, 1,
Mr. Hertzel? Just
that opening question. What is the question?
It says, do you recall whether
Yes, um, there, there's, there, there seems
to be a slightly missing question, missing question,
but, um, what he answered, uh, he
Just affirmed it, Affirmed that, um, as a matter
of fact, that was how churches, um, behaved.
I'm not sure if the question was defective
or if just the reproduction
of the question in this report was defective.
I'll see if I can, um, clarify that.
Can I then direct attention to question? I think, I
Think the words at the end of paragraph D
probably just need to be in a separate
paragraph, and that, that
Structures the question. Uh,
I think your honor's quite right, probably, uh,
informed the instruction
and so on, should be a tailpiece to all of A to D.
Um, in question G, your honors will see
what was asked, and your honors will see in many parishes
was common practice provided there was agreement
of local state school authorities for priests
to give religious instruction lessons
to Catholic students at the school.
I'm so sorry. Is this question G? Yes, question G.
But that has to be read with the previous answer to question
F on the previous page.
Your honors will see there that, uh, priests,
It's expressed in terms of, uh, parish priests,
the question, but the answer is given in terms
of priests were subject to the authority
and direction of the diocesan bishop in terms
of determining a priest
duties, responsibilities, and priorities.
He was expected to go where he was sent
and do what he was told by the bishop.
So notice then, in the answer to question G,
and I'll come back to this, while they had to
of course be agreement of local school authorities, in light
of the previous answer, whether a priest could take up, uh,
the position at a state school was ultimately under the
control of the bishop to appoint a priest
to a particular role.
And the answer to question H makes clear that doing
that role, uh, was, uh, viewed as part
of the priest's responsibility as part of his ministry.
Your honors will see that in the answers to Q
at letters Q2 V.
If your honors then turn over to page 4, 4, 2,
your honors will see what was asked in question J.
And then the answer standard expectation of all priests,
that their engagement with the young people
of the parish was a most important
and valued part of the ministry youth groups, movie nights,
camps, sporting teams, choirs, and so on.
And notice that this evidence, that is the evidence
that I've just taken your honors to,
is expressed generally about priests,
not merely about parish
priests to the extent that it matters.
Now, that is the, that evidence is the context, uh, for
what appears in what was agreed between the parties.
If your honors turn back to the agreed facts at page 80,
your honors will see the agreed facts of paragraphs 21
to 20, uh, three.
And again, just to situate these by reference
to the respondent's status of facts document, we agree
with the matters that are in item 16 to 18
and 20 of that document,
but this evidence reveals something of a missed focus
with respect in the court of appeals reasons.
Would your honors take up the court
of appeals reasons at Poor appeal?
Book 1 9 1
At paragraph 2 0 5,
criticizing, again, the primary judge's reasons,
particularly at, uh, 2, 2 8.
Secondly, and it's a small point,
but the decision to permit Father Picken
to conduct strip strip classes at a government school was
ultimately the decision of the head of the school
or state government, um, that, that, uh,
is not right in a relevant sense.
Of course, uh, there had to be agreement
of school authorities, but that's rather beside the point.
Beside the point is that performing that role was part
of the responsibility.
Oh five, I'm sorry, paragraph 2 0 5, your Honor, is
what I was directing attention to.
And the point is that, um, part is that performing
that role, while of course, requiring the agreement
of the head of the school was part of the role of the priest
as part of his mission to interact with children,
ultimately at the direction of the bishop.
And that is actually, um, ultimately conceded, uh,
at the end of paragraph 2 0 5, which was an inference,
which, uh, justice Leming drew that, um, it was a matter
for the headmaster or head mistress to choose whether
to have such a class at school.
But then it was left to the various denominations
to determine who would attend precisely it.
It was ultimately a decision of the bishop as
to whether anyone, and if so, who would attend
to fulfill that role.
And in doing so as part of the, uh, religious mission,
uh, of the diocese. And so, but isn't there
Another element there, which comes back to this question
of nondelegable duty
or probably anterior duty of care.
How does the child come to be in the scripture class?
And, um, that one might think would be
because the parents gave permission for the child
to be in the class, or possibly
because the child without the parent's permission
decided to be in the class.
And that is how the priest comes to have some degree of care
for the child in relation to that scripture class.
That's so not just
because the, the diocese has given a priest
a roving mission of pastoral care in relation to children,
That that is so, but the way that the child comes
to be at the presbytery is the decision of the priest.
And that is why, uh, as your honors will recall
that the framing of the duty is important.
Um, so to the ex to that extent, that is to the extent
that I've, uh, qualified what appears at paragraph 2 0 5,
the same qualification is necessary in the respondent's
status of facts document to what appears at item 19
of that, uh, document.
And so what I have then said
so far addresses in the disputed facts document
item five of the disputed facts document.
Um, the converse of the priestly role,
to which I have drawn attention, uh, is the then, um,
societal attitudes by which priests were figures of serious
and unquestionable authority, particularly for those
of the Catholic faith.
Um, we've given your honor's references
to the evidence in paragraph 29
of our written submissions in chief,
and also the disputed facts document at 0.6.
I'm not going to take your honors through all of that, um,
evidence, but, uh, we, so that's evidence directed to, um,
the then societal attitudes by which priests were figures
of serious and unquestionable authority, particularly
amongst those of the Catholic faith.
Um, in relation to the respondent's status
of facts document, we agree with
what appears at items 15 and 23.
Now, those societal attitudes increase the power imbalance
that would exist in any event between a priest on one hand
and a child on the other.
But I wanna be clear about this.
Our submissions do not turn on
how religious the appellant was,
or even whether the children in question were
of the Catholic, uh, faith at
likewise, they're not defeated by a submission which is made
by the respondent that the appellant didn't regularly
attend, uh, mass, quite apart from any, uh,
religious deference to priests.
The class of people, uh, with whom this duty is concerned
that is children, is a well-recognized class
of vulnerable people, in any event, quite apart from
that religious, uh, aspect.
So do you need item six? Uh, we do not, is not your case.
We do not. It helps, but we don't need it.
Um, because cases like Guy
and Downs recognize that children per se, are, um,
a vulnerable class which can generate, uh, a duty extending
to the control of third parties.
Um, now those matters together with the points
that I've already made about Father Pickens, control
of the presbytery
and the ministry that he was expected
to undertake directed to children.
Uh, address what we want to say about the disputed facts,
documents, fact 12, capital A.
Um, staying with that disputed facts document,
Just looking at paragraph at point 13
and 14, uh, those disputed factual matters
are irrelevant to the question of whether duty was owed.
It is cross those out
With six For our part.
The respondent may say that they're relevant,
but even if it was so that 13
and 14 were true, they don't matter.
Um, can I then, as the next point, tending in favor
of the existence of a duty point to the control,
which the diocese in the person of the bishop had, uh,
over both priests, not merely parish priests, um,
but also diocesan premises.
I've already pointed out, uh, the material which
demonstrates that both in the agreed facts
and in Father Dylan's, uh, evidence,
again, this is not a case in which, um,
it's suggested the diocese had a duty
to prevent harm being caused by an independent third party.
It's a case involving harm being caused by, um, people
who were hierarchically part of the diocese,
but subject to its control through the person of the bishop
Almost. Um,
It, it, it, it bears
A strong analogy to the hazardous activities cases.
It, it, it does. It's one of the analogies I'm gonna come
to when it comes to nondelegable duty.
But yes, finally,
may we make some points about awareness of risks.
Um, as for the general awareness of the church,
would your honor's turn back
to Father Dylan's first report in volume, one
of the appellant's book of further materials?
This is an element of knowledge,
Yes, This is the knowledge element you
need for this duty.
Um, I may not need it
because ought to know is sufficient. That's
Why. So
we need some form of knowledge.
We accept, you accept that
and you put it on two bases, ought to know or knew
That is so. And
this is the evidence or the findings? Yes.
The findings that are going
to be gonna take us to on that element. Yes.
Thank you. So would your honors turn to, um,
father Dylan's first report at page 4, 4, 2?
Your honors will see on page 4, 4, 2 at lines n to O.
Um, he accepted that community awareness of the potential
for abuse by priest
and religious was minimal at the time, if not, uh,
totally unknown.
But then would your honors turn to page 4, 4, 3?
Um, your honors will see, uh, that,
uh, he says at letters D to F, that among Catholic people,
um, that was still virtually unknown, the crimes and so on.
But he then says, a likely exception to this overall lack
of awareness would be the knowledge
of some people in positions
of high authority in the church such as bishops,
religious superiors, and provincials,
who would have been aware of complaints
and allegations made against other priests,
brothers and nuns.
And then he repeats it, I to Kay, uh, uh,
that they wouldn't have reached the awareness
of the Catholic populace generally.
But that's not a statement about every bishop.
It is not, it is a,
a statement about the likely knowledge
of bishops generally. So
Don't we need a finding about the knowledge
of the Bishop of Maitland?
We do at the time we do. But this is evidence from which
Or what he, or what he ought to have known.
Yes. So this is, this is evidence from which both
of those findings can be made. It,
It, it may promote an infra inference
That that is so, so the first point we
make, um, sorry, just
So I'm clear, this is the extent of the
Evidence. There's more evidence. This
is the
first part of the evidence.
Thank you. So this evidence simply shows at a general level,
there was awareness within the church at the bishop level,
um, and a difference in knowledge of what, uh, as he said,
of complaints and allegations made against other priests,
brothers and nuns.
And the complaints he's obviously talking about in the
context of the previous paragraph is complaints to do
with sexual abuse of children.
If your honors then go to the court of appeals reasons,
please, at
page 1, 9 2 In paragraph
2 0 7, there is criticism here
of the findings the primary judge made, which are extracted,
uh, on the previous page, uh,
and the criticisms which are being made of, uh, uh, what,
uh, appear at paragraphs 2, 3, 1, 2, 2, 3, 2,
and your honors will see.
The finding was about Father Dylan's evidence about the
awareness, which bishops
and other senior members of the church then had about the
risks which priests could pose to children given complaints,
which they'd received, which was not widely
known in the community.
And your honor, we'll, your honors will see in paragraph
2 0 7 that was criticized.
The first reason it was criticized was the reference
to bishops in the plural,
which suggests her honor didn't confine her analysis
to people within the geographic diocese of Maitland,
of which there was only one bishop.
But that is with respect and unfair criticism,
because what her honor was clearly doing was reasoning from
the knowledge of bishops generally
to an inference either about the actual knowledge
of this bishop, or what the bishop,
what this bishop ought to have known.
And there's then a criticism
that the primary judge's reasons misstate the evidence
that is expanded upon in 2 0 9.
Your honors will say there's a long quote from Father
Dylan's evidence, bolding the passage
to which I've drawn attention.
And in paragraph two 10, justice Lehman criticizes this
for elevating criticize the primary judge
for elevating Father Dylan's likely exception to a finding
of actual knowledge.
But there's, um, nothing wrong in a civil case
with reasoning from likely to proceeding on that basis.
Um, the balance of the paragraph, uh, as I have said,
is addressed by the fact that there's nothing wrong
with reasoning from a statement about the knowledge
of bishops generally in the absence
of any evidence being put forward by the respondent,
to the contrary, uh, to the likely knowledge of this bishop
or to, uh, what this bishop ought to have known.
Um, so the criticism, uh, there's an additional, uh,
criticism which is made here that, um,
father Dylan didn't provide any reasons for his opinion,
but that is with respect unfair, given his vast experience.
I won't take your honors back to it,
but at pa at the beginning of his report,
it sets out his 55 years of experience, uh,
in the Catholic church, both generally at the parish level,
but then in later years dealing
with child abuse complaints in particular.
So that's the general matters.
Can I now come to the evidence specific to this diocese?
And we point to two matters.
The first, I'm so sorry. What
Were the precise findings of the primary judge?
Um, in, in, in
Summary form, um, para,
so just staying, it's getting the magnitude.
Yes. It's 2, 2, 2 30.
One is, uh, where this, um,
finding particularly, uh, is made.
That was the paragraph that Justice Lehman was
specifically directing himself to.
So paragraph 2, 31 of the primary judge's, uh, reasons Mr.
Hertzfeld, that paragraph refers
to given the complaints which they had received.
Is that what you're about to take us to?
So that is a reference still
to Father Dylan's general evidence.
I see. Um, that
that was why bishop's generally would've had knowledge.
I'm now about to take you to some specific evidence,
and that is what, um, her honor, the primary judge says.
She says that Accords with the Kain report
where reference was made to the then bishop
of the diocese having to deal
with the risks which priest posed in the 19, uh, fifties.
So, can I just go back, is 2 3 1 a finding of
actual knowledge or a finding of constructive,
because the conclusion is an acceptance of a duty of care.
Yes. The, the first part of 2 3, 1 is not a finding
of actual knowledge of this bishop.
Right. The second part does relate specifically
to this bishop, as I'm about to show your
Honor, reference to that accords.
Yes. I see. Thank you.
Um, And you're gonna, you're gonna have
to address Justice Lehman's criticism of the Kain report.
I am, I am.
Um, so if your honor's turn in, uh, the book
of further materials, please to page 2 9 6.
The appellants. Yes. I'm so sorry.
Appellant's book of further materials, volume one,
page 2 9 6,
um, y your honors, we'll see here, this is a letter
of the 5th of November, 1987, um, sent
to the then bishop of this diocese.
And your honors will see that it is about a father, uh,
Macklin, Lindon, McLendon
Lindon, And your honors.
We'll see from the second paragraph at letters L to P
it is about allegations of sexual activity with children.
Now, what is significant about this letter is not
what appear, what occurred in 1987.
What is significant is
what is on the next page of the letter.
Your honors will see that at letters H to JJ in any case,
according, uh, to that priest.
There had been previous similar allegations,
the first one occurring in 1954 when the,
the late Bishop toy had caused to discuss the issue
with him at the time.
Now, Bishop Toy was the bishop of the diocese
relevant at the time of this matter.
Uh, and we agree in that regard with, uh, what's said in 0.4
of the respondent's status of facts document.
If your honors then go to what the Court
of Appeal said about this, your honors will see that, uh,
on page, uh, one nine, uh, four.
Hit the paragraph number Please. Paragraph two 11.
Thank you. Um, his honor picked up the fact
that her honor was wrong to refer in terms
to the Kain report.
The Kain report was not in evidence.
Is this a letter that was attached to the report?
It was included in, that's how the error has occurred
because, um, I think during opening submissions,
it might have been intended to tender the whole report,
but the relevant thing was actually this letter.
So there is a slip in the primary judge's reasons in
referring to the Kain report per se,
but substantively what the primary judge said was correct,
based on this letter that it
provided evidence that there had been a complaint
to the then bishop about precisely this kind
of activity. But, but
Justice Leming said the canine report was not
in evidence and that includes
The letter? No, the letter
was tended separately. Separately. Okay.
Thank you. But the canine report was not in evidence.
What your honors will then see in paragraph 214
is that, uh,
Was it, was it put in the court of appeal
that the reference to the canine report
by the primary judge was really intended
to be a reference to the letter?
I'm not sure. I'll check.
Um, what your honors will, uh, see though in paragraph 214
is Justice Lehman seeking to deal substantively
with the letter and
Well, he, he acknowledges that all
that was tendered was the letter.
Yes. He says that in two 13 in the second
Sentence. Um, that, that's
so, um,
but then at paragraph 214, he seeks
to deal substantively with the letter.
And what he says is that, um, it doesn't show what was said.
It seems reasonable to assume that the priest denied
or wrong, uh, doing, and that may be true,
but it's not significant for present purposes.
What's significant is not whether the priest denied
or wrongdoing or whether Bishop Tuy rejected the allegations
or investigated them.
What's significant for our purposes is
that the allegations were made
and the very making of those allegations must have given
rise to knowledge that there was a risk
that a priest might abuse children,
or at the very least that it ought to have done so.
And so the criticisms that the Court
of Appeal made at paragraph 218 are with respect, uh, not
sound, I'm sorry, 214.
Uh, and the same is so about 250, uh, 215
in paragraph 216.
It said at the end of the paragraph, even if Bishop Toy knew
or believed or suspected that
that priest preyed upon children in 1969,
he was no longer in the diocese.
And again, that is a mis focus
because the relevant thing is what this complaint showed,
not about this priest in particular,
but about the risk generally posed by priests.
Oh, the, he, the, he's Father McClindon, not Bishop
Toy. Yes. Right.
Um, the second matter
to which we point about this diocese in
particular is the evidence of Mr.
McClung. Um, uh, would your honors in,
uh, the appellant's book of further materials volume two,
please turn to page six.
Nine. Uh, two,
uh, before I start this, I can see the time, uh, your Honor,
is that Yes, it is convenient time. Convenient time.
Thank you. We'll take the morning
All stand.
The High Court of Australia will resume
sitting in 15 minutes.
Silence all stand.
The high court of Australia is now in session.
Please be seated.
Um, I'm conscious of time. So can I deal with Mr.
McClean's evidence rather briefly.
Um, he gave evidence
that in 1966 he had complained to the then parish priest,
father Durham, about being abused by Father Picken himself.
There was no challenge to that evidence.
C appellant's book of further materials volume two,
page 6 9 2.
And the evidence itself, which I'm not going to go
to in the interest of time, is it volume one,
page 3, 5 4.
But where, where does that go?
'cause Father Doran is not a person
to whom you can attribute any knowledge to the
Diocese. Well, that is
the point that I now want to tackle. Alright.
Um, your honor's, I,
I'm being slow and I know you're up short of time,
but I do think it's important that you identify
what you say is the evidence in its precise
Form. Yes.
So I'll give your honors the paragraphs
to his affidavit, which as I say is at volume one,
page 3, 5 4.
The relevant paragraphs are paragraphs
4, 6, 9 to 12,
and then 14 to 16.
The your honors have seen Father Dylan's evidence
that a parish priest was the highest local church authority
for members of the church.
The Diocese of Maitland contained 57
parishes at the time.
The evidence for that is at page 1, 8 6.
And so treating the diocese a bit like a body corporate
to whom knowledge may be attributed,
it is in our submission unthinkable that the knowledge
of those 57 parish priests would not be attributed.
They are immediately hierarchically placed below the bishop.
And if their knowledge is not attributed, then it would seem
that only the bishop's knowledge could count.
And that's inconsistent with treating the diocese
as an incorporated institution.
Can we commend to your honors the analysis in O'Connor
and comment solely that's 2022
VSC 3 1 3 at paragraphs
2 35 to
2 46, 2 8 2
and 2 8 9 to 2 9 5.
And if that attribution is correct, then in fact,
the diocese here had knowledge of the risk posed
by Father Picken himself.
Can I show your honors what the Court
of Appeals said about this at court?
At, uh, appeal book page 1 9 8,
Your honors we'll see at 2 2 9.
Um, that what was said was the knowledge of each
and every priest is not taken to be knowledge
of the institution as a whole,
the institution there being the Roman Catholic Church.
But that focuses on the wrong question
because what is here at issue is a much narrower question
of attribution to the diocese.
In paragraph, uh, two 30, it said
that the plaintiff's case turned on establishing knowledge
by the bishop or senior members of the diocese.
That's not, um, correct insofar as it suggests
that attribution was not, uh, in play.
Mr. Hertzel,
Does this involve treating the organization
for the purposes of the Civil Liability Act as extending
to the bishop and then the priests
There? There's two different
ways of viewing it.
If one is trying to identify individuals as part
of the organization, that is one.
But probably the better way
of viewing it is treating the organization
for these purposes, a separate legal entity,
separate from any of those
individuals, a bit like a company.
And then the question is, um,
whose individual knowledge can
be attributed to that company?
Uh, either approach is sufficient for our purposes. Who,
Who are the members that
of the unincorporated association?
Well, there aren't members
because it's not, in truth,
an unincorporated association. I'll
Ask a different question. You
who are, who are the identified people within the
organization that you rely upon?
Um, I don't rely on any people within the organization.
I rely on the organization as an entity,
and I identify individuals with it in the same way
that I can identify individuals with any other body,
corporate and individual.
But sorry, but I just take a body corporate, I can say,
could you please identify who are the individuals within
that body corporate who I might attribute you?
I say, well, there's board of directors, there's directors,
I can look at senior management, I can identify
by their positional role.
Yes. That's the question I'm asking rather than any
legal formulation of
It. I, I understand.
Um,
and I would identify at least the bishop
and the parish priests
Of the whole, of the Diocese.
Of the diocese. But,
But that's not the relevant defendant.
The relevant defendant is this diocese.
And so what you are, what you are doing is for the purposes
of attribution, you are including all
of the priests in all of the diocese? N
No, no, only the priest of this diocese.
Father Doran was a priest of this diocese.
So just we are clear. The organization is the Diocese
of Newcastle and Maitland.
Yes. And the people within it
that you identify are the bishop of the Diocese of Maitland,
Newcastle, and Maitland,
and then the parish priests within that diocese.
Yes. Although, as I said, I I,
I've resisted the need given this statutory structure
to do that task.
But yes. Can
I ask you a question? Um,
sorry, Mr. Herzfeld, uh, I can understand how
your reliance on the Civil Liability Act would apply
prospectively, but how does it apply
to fact finding in 1969?
Um, because the act applies retrospectively.
So the ACT requires us to treat the, I
I thought I read in Justice
LE's Judgment, it's perspective
Only different part of the act.
These provisions of the act apply retrospectively,
And, and we know that from We,
I'll turn up the reference. Thank
You for that. Very grateful to
you.
Um, Mr. Mr uh, hurtful.
What is the risk that you say was known, um,
on the basis of Father Doran's knowledge
That Father Picken himself might abuse
children on church property? Is
That, that's expressed at a very high level
of generality having regard to what, um,
this, uh, Mr.
McClung says about his experience.
I mean, in particular, the fact that he says that he,
he didn't feel like a naive
child at the time of the abuse is
He was slightly older.
But in our submission, once those facts are known, the risk,
as I've articulated it, was one
that was in fact known to this bishop child.
Anything from baby to 18? Yes.
Yes. Um, can I,
uh, just deal quickly,
Do you have any, I mean, this is a,
obviously a very important question about attribution.
Um, I understand your submission to be that the 57
or so parish priests, their acts
and knowledge are acts and knowledge of the diocese.
Yes. Um, as well as obviously the bishop. Yes.
Do we have any findings of fact
or, um, any evidence that you can take us to
that establishes, um, that
hierarchy relationship other than
what you've already taken us to?
Um, there, there is some documentary evidence which lists
people, but it doesn't do any more than the evidence
that I've already taken your honors to.
So, so what, what is wrong then with, with 2 32?
I was gonna come to 2, 2 32.
So, um, uh, it, it is, um,
the first thing that's wrong with 2 32 is it's not correct
that no submission of the kind, uh, was put.
And I'll give your honors the reference.
It's respondent's book of further materials, page 1 1 4,
paragraph, uh, 60.
Um, but the second thing is wrong is
that it assumes there's no duty
to communicate the complaint.
And, um, in the reference to O'Connor
and comments solely that I've given to Your Honor,
that topic is your honor's that topic is dealt with.
Uh, your Honor, the answer to your honor,
justice Stewart's question about, um, the application
of these provisions is section 45
of the civil thank you for the liability act.
Um,
Is the, just coming back to, I'm sorry,
to my question about the level of generality is the,
is the test nothing more than what is within the class
of injury?
Uh, yes.
And here, even at, at this very specific level,
which is even more specific than I need,
there is the attribution of knowledge of the risk
of sexual assault by priests of children,
Of father picken by children.
If Father Doran's evidence is, sorry,
father Doran's knowledge is attributed, if
that knowledge is not attributed,
there is still other material pitched at the more general
level that I've taken your honors to.
So the ion that's put is I've taken
to the general evidence and the findings in relation to
that, that's sufficient for my case.
If that's not, then I rely further on the evidence of father
to make good any or to,
to improve the specificity of the risk.
That's So Mr. Hertzel, did you, did you say 45?
Yes. That might need to be checked.
Oh, I think it's in a schedule. I'm so sorry.
I think it's section 45 of, uh, the schedule
to the civil library.
Thank you for that first, I'm so sorry. Not at
All.
Um, can I just finally on ordinary duty of care, say this,
it is not an answer for the, um, respondent to say
that Father Pickin's particular conduct
that is supplying cigarettes and alcohol to children
and sexually abusing them was utterly out of order for
what a priest could properly be doing on the,
uh, premises of the presbytery.
Um, that approaches the question of duty of care
with too narrow a focus.
Um, the fact that a surgeon conducts a, a
surgery in a grossly negligent manner doesn't deny
that the surgeon owed a duty
of care when performing that surgery.
Um, indeed that's likely to be evidence
of a breach of duty of care.
It's the more general circumstances which call forth, uh,
the duty, not the particular way in which the wrongdoer
breached it, uh, on a particular occasion that is relevant.
Um, can I then turn to Nondelegable duty?
Uh, and can I hand up
With More than one copy?
Yes. I understand Your
honors have now been, we have a good note.
Yes, yes. You're on page Note. Thank you. Do you
Have that?
So just focusing on that
and can I frame that as a, uh, non delegatable duty?
It's, did the diocese owe a duty to ensure
that reasonable care was taken
to avoid reasonably foreseeable physical injury
to children invited onto diocesan premises caused
by the conduct of diocesan priests at those premises, um,
that, uh, a non-eligible duty was pleaded
and it was put in issue in the document the list
of issues document, but if, of course, was not the subject
of a great deal of attention,
because at the time of the trial, uh,
intermediate appellate authority accepted
that vicarious liability was, uh, available.
Um, the respondent suggests a couple
of times in the disputed facts documents
that if we had focused more squarely on Nondelegable duty,
their evidence might have been different.
Um, that shouldn't be accepted for two reasons.
The first is that the respondent couldn't have known
until closing submissions whether the appellant would focus
on nondelegable duty or not,
because nondelegable duty was pleaded
and identified by the parties as an issue.
That document, identifying the list
of issues wasn't handed up until the third day of trial
after the close of, uh, evidence.
Secondly, and in any event, in this case, all
of the factors relevant to a nondelegable duty were the same
as those which were, uh, relevant to the question
of an ordinary duty of care and or vicarious liability.
And so the suggestion that there may have been some
different evidence advanced by the respondent,
which was relevant only to non delegatable duty,
but not to the cases, uh, was ultimately more fully pressed,
is just not a credible one.
W why do you confine the non duty to,
uh, the conduct of
priests, uh, at the
Premises? Um,
because that's all I need.
It, it would be possible to, uh, frame it more broadly,
but all I need in this case is that,
and we are also conscious of, uh, comments again
that have been made about the need for, um,
reasonably precise framing in, uh, a duty,
particularly on the non
Time on your case.
The priests are part of the organization that is
to be treated as an
entity for this purpose.
So it's a very odd nondelegable duty, I think.
Well, um, if I was dealing with the conduct
of the priest at a school, for example, during one
of the lessons, this wouldn't be sufficient.
But for the present purposes, it is sufficient.
It is sufficient because I'm identifying something squarely
within the, um, conduct of the
hypothesized organization that is engaging
with children in particular at, at diocese and premises. So
What, why wouldn't it be
Sufficient if the diocese sends a pre stout into a school
and the abuse occurs in the school?
It, it may be, uh, it just creates a, a, a,
a matter which is not part of this case
and has less of a degree of control by the diocese.
And I'm aiming, I'm aiming at the point that I need to be,
So can we just take the school example?
Yes. For the non eligible duty, there are, as
what it's explained in Bird at 37,
in effect two requirements.
There's the entrusting by the parent of the child
to the school, and then the adoption by the school
of the care giving rise to, um, a duty
to ensure that care is taken.
Yes. What happens here?
You adopt both, you, you don't dispute those elements. No.
And what happens here in the application
of both those elements in terms of the facts
and where you say you get to,
Yes. The diocese
had determined
to engage upon an educational ministry directed to children.
It had decided to do so via priests to whom it had delegated
that task as an aspect of that subject to the control
of the Bishop Parish.
Priests were permitted to hold events as they saw fit,
including children at diocesan property,
namely Presbyteries at which they lived,
and the bishop retained control of all of the priests
of the diocese and the diocesan property that at a,
at a punchy level, if I can put it that way,
is the highlights of the material
that I've taken your honors through, which we rely on
as the analogy to a school case.
Where's the entrusting by the parent
of the child to the diocese?
That that is obviously a particular feature with, uh,
schools, but is not an essential feature, uh, of a duty
of care which is owed to children.
Um, in fact, uh, there is, um, as I mentioned in one
of my heads of, uh, inter not heads of interest, one
of the particular features of a duty of care,
there is evidence which shows how parents, uh,
particularly Catholic parents did do that.
But this is not a case where there is any formal, um,
entrusting by enrolling your child in a school,
Mr.
Um, in the, the, the duty of care that you've formulated,
you've used invited onto the premises.
So you've used the passive voice.
You are not saying that the children were invited onto the
premises by the diocese.
Well, I, I, I said invited in the sense of invited
by someone that the diocese authorized to do that in his,
in this case, the parish priest.
Um, just to go back to your honor, justice Gordon,
there is obviously not, uh, the same degree of formal, uh,
enrollment by a parent of their child in a school. I
Don't suggest you need formal enrollment.
There has to be some, I think, entrustment entrusting
of the child by the parent.
Well, And it may be,
and so it may be that you have facts which identify
informally, um,
The, the, the, the only facts which identified informally
are one the facts here that, um, the children went
and, uh, the parents, uh, believed they were going, I think
to, um, plaintiff said that he had had been going to, uh,
religious class or scripture class or something like that.
Um, but the more general point about the duty is only the
one about, uh, uh, societal attitudes to, uh,
priests and the educational ministry
that the diocese had set itself on
There, an entrustment by the school the school had,
leaving aside whether it has any liability,
but the parents entrust of the school,
school then entrusts part
of its effectively its function to the priest
In that exercise in that.
And that formed part
of a broader educational ministry by the church.
Um, there, there was also, of course, the, uh,
aspect that church teaching would've required
Catholic parents at any rate, to trust priests.
But I've made clear that this is not suggested
that the duty is limited to Catholic children's,
So that if a school was to entrust some part of
its function, say group of courses
or PE to an organization who then accepted
that entrustment, sure,
the school might have a non-eligible duty,
but you'd say the receiving
organization may have one as well.
Yes. Although that kind of analogy we're in, but I,
but I, it is, but I don't wanna put too much emphasis only
on the school communion classes
because I understand that, uh, the ministry here included
that, but was not limited to that.
You have to be very precise
or at least sufficiently precise about what the task is
that's, that's delegated by the, uh, by the diocese
and entrusted
By the plaintiff or the Appearance.
Yes. And I identified in my answer to Justice Gordon
what the high points of that is.
We know from the past cases we've been told so much
of it depends on a really close scrutiny of the facts,
a whole range of past authorities in relation to this issue.
So to pick up on the question you asked by Justice Gleason
in response to me, um,
at a, at a general level,
and I'm not saying this is this case, one can have intimacy
and control in relation to a vulnerable child,
which one could, um, see him in the relation
of a pastoral relationship between a particular person
and a diocese in the context of the people you identified
giving rise in the circumstances to some form of entrusting
of care and one could identify particular facts.
Just wanna be abundantly clear what you say are your facts
that give rise to that kind of analysis.
And if it's not that analysis, what is
It? Um,
uh, your Honor, I, um,
You may wanna take it on notice, Mr.
Swell. I, I can, I can, I'm also conscious
that I'm in about 10 minutes going to tell Your Honor,
in the next 10 minutes, going to tell your honors
that Lapore was wrongly decided.
So I wanna leave a little bit of time to do that.
So I will, um, see if I can do better than that,
uh, afterwards.
Thank you. And so can I come to that point?
Because we, um, obviously despite everything else
for a nondelegable duty of care, also need
to succeed on the point on which we failed in the Court
of appeal, which was whether a non duty can be breached,
if I can put it that way, by intentionally wrongful conduct
by intentionally wrongful conduct ahead,
but by the by, by the delegate.
By the delegate, yes.
Why, why do you need to establish that?
Why do you need to say that? Um, Lapore is wrong?
Lapore was argued on the basis
that an intentional tot itself was something
that gave rise to this so-called nondelegable duty.
It wasn't argued on the basis
that a nondelegable duty is a duty for which
one party has assumed a responsibility independently
of whether or not the tort is intentional
or not assumed, a responsibility
to ensure that care is taken.
Yes, and that is how we would put it.
Um, it did seem to us that, uh, at least the way
that it was reasoned in La Poe would stand against that.
Um, and so let me, let me deal with that.
Um, c can I make, uh, firstly my submissions about matters
of principle and then a restraint about overruling, um,
as matters of principle, there are authorities prior
to Lapore in which a nondelegable duty has been
breached by reason of intentional
and unlawful conduct of the delegate.
One, which your honors noted in burden
and DP at paragraph 52 is Morrison
CW Martin and Sons.
That's the case about the furrier who, uh, gave the fur
for cleaning to a cleaner.
The employee of the cleaner made off with it,
and the plaintiff sued for the cleaner,
and that was analyzed by the master of the roles
as a nondelegable duty case.
And that is the better analysis of it,
as this court noted in Byrd.
And the Supreme Court of the uk, uh, took the same view
of it, or at least that it was a possible view
of it in Woodland at paragraph seven,
there's actually a second case
to which we would draw attention mentioned in the reasons
of this court in Bernie Port Authority.
Would your honors take that up, please? 1 7 9 CLR five 20.
What volume? Mr. Uh, volume three. Tab 13.
Thank you. And if your honors turn to page 5 5, 1
of the CLR print, um,
their honors were there discussing the, um, uh,
rule in Rylands and Fletcher,
so the dangerous activity cases,
and assimilating that within the ordinary law of negligence,
in particular, so as to give rise
to a nondelegable duty of care.
And if your honors turn to page 5, 5 3, their honors refer
to a previous decision of this court McKinnon Waddle.
And what your honors will see is that what occurred there
was that the delegate burnt, it started a fire,
even though it was unlawful
and dangerous activity, it was done for a good reason
that is clearing the property.
But it was nonetheless an intentional act done,
which was unlawful, and that was
nonetheless said to give rise to a breach of the rule.
Inlands and Fletcher now understood as breach
of a nondelegable duty of care.
So previous authorities do not stand for the proposition
that one cannot have a, um, breach of a nondelegable duty
of care for intentional tort.
Could your honor then take up Lapore itself?
That's two 11 CLR volume four, tab 24.
And, um, can we start
with the dissenting reasons of justice?
Ew, On page 5 7 2
of the CLR print
And your honors, we'll see on page 5 7 2 at the end
of paragraph 1 6 1, his honor,
correctly identified Morrison's, uh, CW Martin
and Sons, as an example in paragraph 1 6 2.
His honor correctly explained that prior to the abolition
of the forms of action, a plaintiff could frame a cause
of action either as a trespass
or an action on the case, depending on whether the plaintiff
alleged intention.
It wasn't about the facts, it was about the allegations,
of course, that being essential in the
era of the forms of action.
But his honor then went on to observe that
after the air abolition,
there's no reason why you can't sue in negligence
for an intentional infliction of harm.
And his honor gave them as example in footnote 2, 4 8,
the decision of this court in gray
and motor accident, uh, commission that case was
of course about exemplary damages,
but there was no suggestion
that there was anything defective about the framing
of the negligence claim, even though
what in it involved was deliberate running down by a car
of one person, uh, by another, which in fact led
to a criminal prosecution
Point being that, as I understand Justice Bob,
justice McCue was saying, is it was sort of illogical
that you could have breach of duty for a negligent breach,
but not for gross or flagrant breach.
That's so, and I'll come back to that point,
but in terms of authority, what His Honor said was, uh,
correct, uh, his honor.
Then at paragraph 1, 6 4, particularly over the page,
identified that to subject educational authorities
to a nondelegable duty of care, even extending
to intentional torts, um, didn't mean
that educational authorities were helpless
to take preventative actions.
And your honors will see, uh, what is on upset about it, um,
the reasons of the majority in the interests of time.
Can we point to five significant errors in those reasons?
And I will give your honors the references
to the paragraphs without actually going through them.
Firstly, the majority seemed
to think there was a conceptual problem
with saying there was a breach of a nondelegable duty
of care by the school in the case
of an intentional wrongdoing by the teacher.
The references are particularly apparent in the reasons
of Chief Justice Gleason,
with whom Justice Callan agreed at paragraph 31.
And that, um, as your honor, justice Edelman raised
with me really fails to recognize that the duty
as a personal duty to the school to ensure
that reasonable care is taken for the student.
The school fails in that duty, whether the conduct
of the teacher is well intentioned, but,
or negligent just as much as if the conduct
of the teacher is intentional in terms of the duty holder,
the school, the quality of the failure is the same.
That is that the school has failed to ensure that, uh,
reasonable care was taken for the student.
There's no conceptual problem.
That's three members of the majority,
the other two members.
Um, this is not said against you,
but the other two members are justices.
Um, Gamo and Hane are more equivocal on this point.
On this particular point,
there's not a conceptual problem.
That's why I identified only Justice,
chief Justice Glac and Justice Callen.
So that's the first problem. The second problem is
that at least Justices Gummo
and Hane seemed to take the view that one couldn't plead
as a negligence case, intentional wrongdoing.
Their honors said that at paragraph two 70, um, now, even if
that point is correct, it's an irrelevance
for the reason I've just given.
Um, it's just not material whether one could bring a,
a negligence claim against the teacher in this example.
But in any event, the reasons are not correct.
As Justice Chu explained.
Um, as for Williams
and Otin, which Justice Chu referred to
that was a pleading point, wasn't a substantive point, uh,
because the court was referring to a time prior
to the abolition of the forms of action.
'cause that's what the South Australian
statute in question required. Well,
There, there's an, there's an ambiguity here,
and it, it may be on one view that justices Gummo
and Hain are not saying anything
different on this point from justice.
Ew, which may in the ambiguity is that prior
to the abolition of forms of action,
what one might have thought of
as negligence may not have included the notion
of an assumption of responsibility.
That that, that that concept was much more closely related
to general assumption Yes.
Um, and promises.
Um, that is so, and we would love to embrace that reading.
But at paragraph two 70, justices, Gummo
and Hayne do also say,
but the intentional infliction of harm cannot be pleaded
as negligence, and they cite a New Zealand case, cousin
and Wilson, that wasn't a form of action case,
but it also doesn't stand for the proposition
for which their honors apparently cited it.
That was a case where a trespass claim failed
because the plaintiffs didn't have possession
of the land in question.
And all that, the high court of New Zealand said was,
there's no duty of care which could be recognized in those
circumstances, not
because it was an intentional infliction of harm case,
but just because it wasn't a case involving
salient features, which gave rise to a duty of care.
Um, the third, uh,
Point, so sorry to labor this,
but I'm, I'm, I'm, I'm not sure
that is necessarily what they're saying.
It's that when one talks about pleading something
as negligence to plead a nondelegable duty
is not comfortably described as a pleading of negligence.
It, it, in other words, as I mentioned to you earlier,
it doesn't matter whether it's negligent
or not, it's an assumed duty yes.
To ensure that care is taken.
And that's why I said the question whether one could plead
a negligence claim against the delegate
is actually an irrelevance.
It's my first answer to this point.
Um, the third point is, the majority considered
that acceptance of liability
for intentional wrongdoing was not necessary
to achieving the policy objects of compensation
or deterrence c paragraphs 36 and 2 6 7.
Um, but those objectives don't really explain nondelegable
duty per se.
Um, it's incoherent to rely on them, uh, as a basis for
limiting non duty cases to, uh,
exclude intentional wrongdoing.
Um, the, uh, there's a related difficulty that, um,
justices, Gummo and Hayne seemed to say,
well, it's terribly unfair.
Look at paragraph 2 67
because the state hasn't engaged in any negligence.
But that's, so for any nondelegable duty,
You would say in relation to that, that
that proceeds from a misunderstanding of the strict nature
of liability under nondelegable duty,
and that you don't have
to establish negligence on the part of the duty
Holder precisely whether the delegate was intentionally
negligent, uh, intentional wrongdoing or negligent.
The fourth point is that the majority seem to consider
that if non-eligible duty extended
to intentional wrongdoing,
it would out flank vicarious liability.
You see that particular paragraph 2 69,
but to some degree that could be said
of any nondelegable duty, um, even accepting
that a nondelegable duty, um,
can't be breached by intentional conduct.
There will be some cases
where a nondelegable duty claim succeeds,
even though a vicarious liability claim would fail in
others, both might succeed and in others both will fail.
That's just a feature of the fact
that there's a different legal doctrine,
which is not coincident with vicarious liability.
If, if your teacher was a contractor,
you'd probably be stuck with vivic, uh,
with a non-eligible duty, wouldn't you?
Yes. But that might succeed.
Where vicarious liability fails, it's not a problem.
And the fifth point is that it was said by the majority
that recognizing a nondelegable duty
for intentional wrongdoing would amount to an absolute duty
to protect every student against any kind of harm.
See, particularly the reasons of Chief Justice Gleason at
paragraph 32 and the reasons of Justice Scow
and Hayne at 2 6 2 to 2 6 3.
Now that fails to recognize
that even a nondelegable duty is not a
duty of unlimited scope.
Um, its scope is confined to the task
or relationship which generates it, and that will be so,
And the entrusting, Yes, but my point here is just
however you generate it, um, it, it will be limited
to the, um, scope that has been identified.
So to take a case which is not about entrusting,
for example, the non-eligible duty of adjoining landholders,
that that is a non delegatable duty,
which applies when one is doing work threatening support
to common walls.
It's not a nondelegable duty
that applies when you walk out your front door
walking your dog. So this, but
Your short point, it's not dealing with a trespasser,
it's dealing with a person who's had the
task delegated to them,
A a and there may be a whole series
of other things it's not dealing with as well.
Um, the point being that whether it covers intentional
or, uh, torts
or not isn't something that leads
to an absolute duty in all cases.
Um, if the priest in this case there'd been a sexual
assault of your client by the priest somewhere other than
the presbytery or the school would, would, is
that the territory would be in
Y Yes. So
it would depend on where, but conceptually, yes.
Um, can we make two other brief points?
Um, first, the decision of the majority
and Lapore produces perverse results.
It produces a perverse incentive on the part
of the defendant to allege the wrongdoers conduct was
intentional and on the part of the plaintiff
to say it was merely negligent
and more seriously than that, as the Supreme Court
of the United Kingdom INS identified, I won't,
I'll just give you honor as the reference in paragraph 51.
It, it has the consequence that, um,
if you have a nondelegable duty owed by someone,
they can only breach it by acting negligently.
But if they negligently entrust, say a child
to a third party who intentionally abuses that child,
then the delegate can
nonetheless be liable for Nondelegable breach
of nondelegable duty.
Is that the passage where the Lord
reads is that can hardly be right?
It is. It's paragraph 51.
Um, the Court of Appeal, uh,
really didn't engage with these issues
because they couldn't, their real point only was, uh,
that nondelegable duty is academically controversial
and uh, that may be so,
but while it's part of our law, it should be principled.
And uh, if it is principled, it extends
to intentional torts.
The other point, the Court of Appeal made was about section
six F of the Civil Liability Act,
which is the last point that I wanna make.
Would your honors take up Section six F please?
Um, your honors will see that it imposes a duty of care
and the content of the duty is
for an organization responsible for a child
to take reasonable precautions from an individual associated
with the organization from Perpe perpetrating child abuse.
And then there's a defense in subsection three.
If the organization establishes that, um,
it took reasonable precautions, um, this statute does not,
um, cover the field.
Your honors will see
that there's definitions in section six, capital D
and six, capital E, uh, which limit its ambit.
Uh, and what is even more limited is that
of course this is only about organizations
responsible for a child.
It's not about nondelegable duties generally.
And so this section creates a new liability
with its own defense in a particular and limited field.
Um, it is, uh, true
that a school authority might be liable under both section
six, capital F and the common law, even
as the common law stands now, um,
there's no problem with that.
You might succeed on one and fail on the other,
but it doesn't freeze the possibility of the development
of the law relating to non duty either in this field of care
for children, uh, or more generally.
It just produces a new cause of action,
which may be different from the common law
in a particular field. If Parliament. It's perspective
Only, isn't it?
It is from The date of the
Act 2018, I think is the date.
You're saying this is simply cumulative upon the common
Law? Yes. And if
Parliament had wanted it to be exhaustive,
it could have said so, but it
Didn't. Mr.
Hertzel subsection two.
In the case of let's say a school,
how would that be different to, if at all,
to a non delegate duty owed by a school?
If Lapore was overturned?
It would simply correct in your
terms, lapore, would it not?
Yes. And then three is a presumption.
Is is an evidentiary effect? It
It is, but it does give a defense to this statutory cause
of action, which would not be available
to a nondelegable duty claim,
but that is so already,
um, your honors, I've left Mr.
McCamish slightly less time than I think I'd promised,
but it is now, uh, his opportunity
to address the notice of contention.
Mr. So before you sit down,
and I know you haven't responded to my question,
I think it would be useful if you could prepare, um,
or I would find it useful if you could prepare
and provide us with just a list of the things that you would
want to say in response to my question.
Yes. If it's not already something that I can point
to in our written material, we will do that.
Thank you Mr. Mish.
Uh, thank you. Your honors, uh, I can be
as brief as possible.
Um, there are two matters in relation to the notice
of contention, which in my submission can be
cleared away fairly quickly.
The first is the faint contention in ground one,
that the Court of Appeal did itself reach a final conclusion
that the appellant had not been sexually assaulted,
as was found in my submission.
That's unsustainable precisely
because of the language of Chief Justice Bell
in paragraphs 13, 14 to 16.
And Justice Leming was equally explicit, uh,
in paragraphs 153 to 154 of the Court of appeal.
Namely that neither of their honors reached a positive final
conclusion to the country of the primary judge.
That's of course why item 11,
that the respondents disputed facts document is the fact
of whether the appellant was abused as was found at trial.
I'll of course come to develop why this court should not
itself make such a finding.
But did they, did they set aside or honor
or honors finding, but it didn't just leave it
hanging as it were?
Your Honor was expressly left hanging precisely
because of the express finding by both of their honors
that the case was to be decided on the
non-existence of the relevant duties.
And therefore then honors never came to a point
of conducting what they identified as a review, real review
to decide for themselves whether the
finding was to be sustained.
They never got to that point.
In in Chief Justice Bell's page 1 1 2 7 of the book,
paragraph 16 in the
third line, his honor refers
to the success of that challenge.
What success is he is his honor referring to,
Oh, with respect it's difficult to see.
The challenge might be viewed as being
an identify identification of something problematic
put by the respondent in the process of fact finding
as distinct from a challenge
to the finding made as a result of that process.
But precisely because he's honor the chief Justice is
referring to Justice Leming
and Justice Leming in the turn is explicit.
Paragraph a hundred fifty three, a hundred fifty four
that he did not need to go to make such a finding.
That's what the last sentence of 16 says,
but where, correct, where the Chief Justice says not only
there's success, which vitiated the primary judge's findings
in this regard, what does that mean?
It's difficult to understand your honors because,
and I need to develop this.
The challenge in the court below was explicitly to the fact
that abuse occurred.
It was not a process based challenge
or an inadequacy of reasons challenge.
And therefore, when, when it comes to the question
of whether the finding was ated, that must surely mean
a positive finding that the fact was wrong
or some different fact was to be found
and their honors in the majority never got to that point.
In my submission, the very circumstance
with which I'm discussing
with your honors is now manifest in this court.
I don't blame my opponents for this,
but there are 19 expressed disputes now raised
your honors will note in the disputed facts document
of one August, there's an item 12 A, so you get to 19
expressly raised facts
because of the fatal ambiguity in the passages I'm just
discussing, plus 67 other findings, the status
of which is now sought to be commented upon
in the document of five August.
Can I say then the second matter
that in my submission can be disposed of quickly,
is the suggestion that there ought be remitter
of these matters to the lower courts
given the circumstances known
to this court about why the matter has been expedited
in my submission, any further delay caused
by re remitter is much to be avoided if possible.
That then leaves of course the substance of, uh,
the contention raised in ground two in circumstances
of course, where the court of appeal declined
to determine those issues, namely the credit-based finding
of whether the appellant was abused as he claimed
and was found by the primary judge.
Second, the finding of the primary judge about breach.
And third, of course the finding
of the primary judge about causation.
Can I turn to the first of those,
the occurrence of the abuse.
It's important to recall as justice ball drew attention
to in the court of appeal what was agreed or found
and what remains undisputed in this court
rather than recite those matters.
Can I draw the court's attention in the status of facts,
document to items and your honors?
We'll see there are a lot of them.
6, 16, 18, 20, 25, 37
to 40 50, 53 and 58.
In essence, those are the matters.
Engaging what justice ball in dissent in the court
of appeal point to namely the undisputed
engagement between the appellant Mr. Perry Father Picken,
the circumstances of them being at the presbytery together,
uh, and the circumstances of them being students
of religious instructions at the hands of Father Picken.
It's particularly important to remember in
that context that Mr.
Perry's statement was not made until
after the appellant had already pleaded his claim,
made two evidentiary statements
and being cross-examined upon them.
And critically Mr.
Perry's evidence corroborated many of the most surprising
and disturbing aspects of the appellant's case, particularly
of course their attendance at the presbytery, the fact
that they were applied with beer
and cigarettes, the fact rather unexpectedly
that Father Picken had a poker machine in the dressing room
of the presbytery, that he made it available to the boys
to play, uh, that the boys were invited to go on holidays
with him, for example, and pausing there even if nothing
else were known about Father Pickin's tendencies.
It's hard, as Justice Bull pointed out,
to see any wholesome reason
that Father Picken could have had for applying the boys
with alcohol and tobacco
or using the gambling machine in as a lu.
Turning then to the respects in which Mr.
Perry's account differed must be record,
that it was never put to Mr. Perry that he was a victim
of abuse, nor that he ever saw the abuse of the appellant.
That was never the appellant's case
and he was never said to have been an
eyewitness in that case.
His evidence was he couldn't recall the
layout of the presbytery.
He couldn't recall how many times they visited
nor the precise timing of those occasions.
His denial that he ever left the appellant alone was
specifically about his denial accepted by the primary judge.
I don't dispute that, that he was never physically absent
from the presbytery because he had been sent away
to the shops, But he couldn't say that he ever saw
that the appellant was ever in the bedroom
or playing the poker machine.
And he sensibly conceded
that he could not say definitively whether the appellant
might have been in a different part of the presbytery
where he, Mr. Perry was not present.
One ceased that in appellant's book
of further material volume two,
it's the transcript page 6 3, 8 to nine.
And in those circumstances, even if accepted in full, Mr.
Perry's evidence fell far short of evidence
that made the acceptance
of the appellant's account impossible
or incontrovertibly wrong.
As I've said, the appellant,
the the respondent Diocese challenge in the Court of Appeal
was expressly a frank challenge to the finding
that the abuse occurred was not put in the basis
of inadequacy of reasons.
And it was squarely put both at trial
and in the court of appeal that the appellant had lied.
It was not put that he was mistaken
or of unreliable memory about the occurrence of the abuse,
but Justice Leming did not decide matters on that basis.
In paragraph 154, justice Leming pointed to four matters
to cast doubt on the primary judge's finding
That was said to be, uh, in paragraph 154, the suggestion
by the primary judge that the removal
of limitation periods affected the evaluation
of the evidence, what was said to be a failure explicitly
to have regard to all uh,
inconsistencies in the appellant's account, what was said
to be an error in describing the appellant's account
as vivid, relying importantly only on the video recorded
aspect of his evidence taken on commission.
And finally what was said to be the impossibility
of excluding the possibility that the plaintiff
had recounted a sincerely held
but erroneous belief arising from the passage of time
his ill health and what was said
to be his sustained substance abuse. I'm sorry,
Could you just tell me what paragraph you're reading from
154 of Justice Lehman's judgment in the Court of Appeal?
It's the matters enumerated A to D within that paragraph.
I I think I have a different No,
I do beg your were honors. Pardon?
Different
Version. You did you have 1 3 8?
I think so.
I do beg your honor this, pardon? It's 1 5 2.
I'm sorry, you honor. Paragraph 1 5 2. I've got
That. I see. Thank you. I'm
sorry,
I do beg your honor's. Pardon? And
your honors will see
what I've just listed are the enumerated sub causes A to D
taking that last matter, which seems to been the most
of concern to justice Leming, the failure
to exclude the possibility of a mistaken memory.
As I've said, that was not the way the trial was conducted
by the respondent diocese.
And in my submission, as justice ball points out,
it was hardly a matter
of which judicial notice could be taken
and certainly not in the absence of procedural fairness
to the appellant by having the point taken at trial.
One might have thought as justice ball did
that if the topic were relevant
and form part of the diocese's case,
it would've been canvased in Dr.
ALA's expert psychiatric report.
But it was not, that's of course the force of the point made
by justice ball in paragraph 268.
So what's the error in the primary judge relying on the
plaintiff's account as vivid
In my submission, it's not clear
The primary judge had the, the plaintiff came in
and gave oral some additional oral evidence
in court. Is that right?
That's so on the second day of the trial,
which was not video recorded on which he was cross examined
precisely on the occurrence of the abuse,
he maintained his account
and that was not available to be viewed by the Court
of appeal in a video form.
Justice Leming was mistaken in saying he had seen in the
form available to the trial judge the whole of the evidence
relevant to the credibility of the appellant's account.
Are you saying he did not see the same
recording as her honor?
He saw the same recording,
but only part of the appellant's evidence was recorded.
And Justice Lemming was mistaken
to think he was not examined upon the occurrence
of the abuse on the second occasion. The reason,
The good point is, is that AA gave additional evidence on
the second day of trial, which is the subject
of a transcript only.
Correct. And that's not referred to in paragraph 152.
No, it is not. It's as simple as that. Your honors,
In other words, the primary judge had some advantages
that Correct. Mr. Leming did not.
Correct.
There's an, there's the error of fact about what was
before the court of appeal.
There's an error of principle
because the court of appeal was squarely in Fox
and Percy territory,
a credibility based assessment in which the atmosphere
of trial and the totality of the evidence was an issue
and was not referred to by the Court of Appeal.
But there's thirdly an error of interpretation
and this might come to the point I think raised
by Justice Beach Jones.
Vivid means lifelike, powerful, clear,
and the appellant undoubtedly used graphic clear language
to describe what he experienced at the
hands of Father Picken.
Now in my submission, the judge's characterization of
that evidence as vivid, memorable, powerful lifelike
was aptly contrasted by her honor to the situation
of Mr. Perry again remembering who was never said
to have been the victim of abuse,
who never experienced any memorably traumatic event,
who had no particular reason to remember anything untoward
that happened to the appellant who was out
of sight of the critical moments.
That seems to be the force
of her honor's use of that language. I
Was gonna say, even if a appellate judge is unable
to perceive something that a trial judge, which is a matter
of such subjective Yes, I said I'm just not sure where
that feeds into error by the primary judge anyway.
Exactly. Fact That I can't perceive something as vivid
as either here nor there.
That's exactly So, and that's, that's the Fox
and Percy era of principle one can't simply say
perhaps I wouldn't have believed him in the absence
of other incontrovertible evidence or glaringly, improbable
or contrary to compelling inferences.
All of the usual things, plus other reasons
that a decision might be vitiated such as a denial
of procedural fairness or legal error, whatever it might be.
So your point is if you take 1, 5, 2, you are left with
and one takes out this reliance upon C and D.
Yes. Do we
need to address A and B?
Yes. Because each of them are equally erroneous.
Now, if Your Honor got to the point of accepting
what I've said about what are plainly the most material
aspects, namely an issue about memory
that was never an issue at trial, an issue about vividness,
which shows a defect in the appellate review
of the evidence at trial, it might very well be that A
and B are simply make weights.
But my submission is first that point A,
which is a reference to what this court decided in GLJ
and then subsequent to the judgment reaffirmed
and repressed in Wilmut was in my submission, not
a matter in which the primary judge urged.
She appropriately identified all of the techniques
by which evidence is to be assessed in cases of this kind
that is far distant in time to the moment of trial.
And in my submission was not to be criticized simply
for saying that by reason
of this court's decision in GLJ circumstances aro arose
that had to be taken into account as a consequence
of the lifting of the limitation views.
There was nothing objectionable in my submission about that.
That's why in my submission point A
is unsatisfactory on its own terms.
Point B of course depends
again on how the primary judge's decision is
to be characterized in which she
of course express due attention to problems in
the appellant's evidence.
They were evident. But it seems to be a requirement
that every alleged inconsistency perceived by Justice Leming
had to be addressed individually, ands, and a.
And in my submission, that's not what the process
of fact finding a trial
or appellate review of such fact finding requires.
Yes. So
that's why in my submission, justice LE's reasons for
disturbing but not o ultimately overruling
or forming a different view than the primary judge's
conclusion on a credit based finding.
Of fact, Mr. Would not be interviewed. Mr. Can
I ask you at 1 3 7 of Justice LE's reasons?
His Honor says in the second sentence
of the plaintiff was not cross-examined on the sexual
assaults when he was recalled at trial. Is that wrong?
That is wrong. Okay.
That is simply wrong. He was indeed
cross-examined about that.
Yes.
At your point about 1 3 8, I think in summary form is
that the trial judge was aware of all that, but
nonetheless it was open to the trial judge
to accept his evidence.
Yes, that's so, yes, I see.
Particularly in circumstances where, um,
the inconsistencies of those accounts perceived
by Justice Leming were for the reasons identified
by justice ball and for the reasons of the agreed facts.
Even in this court, to which I've drawn
to your honor's attention, were not material.
This was not a case where there was any doubt
that this man was in the presbytery with that priest
in those circumstances.
That went a long way to the, the finding.
Can I turn then to breach?
I'm sorry, conceded all of
Agreed. I'm, I'm,
I apologize to my Learned friend.
That being the case. I rely upon my written submissions.
If anything arises, I'll deal with it
and reply as the court pleases.
Please,
Your Honor, as our first proposition concerns a matter
which may now be common ground by reason of
what happened this morning, we pointed out in writing
at paragraph 12 by reference to authority of this court,
that unless an ordinary duty of care is owed,
there can be no question of the duty being nondelegable.
Uh, we understand that now to be common ground
and the authorities that we've given you are firstly Holson
bu, which is in volume three, tab 17,
uh, 2 0 7 CLR 21 at paragraph
27 in the first two sentences.
Uh, The point is explained at some length
and correctly by Justice Giles in the New South Wales Court
of Appeal in Elliot and bicker staff,
which is in volume six,
tab 39 at paragraph 82, uh,
including discussing Chief Justice Brennan's statement in
Northern sandblasting in Harris to that effect.
And importantly, justice Giles correctly concluded
that paragraph by saying that, uh, the anterior question is
what is the scope of the duty of care which is already owed.
If there's no duty of care, there can be no delegatable,
no non-eligible duty of care,
and it follows that the care which the defendant must ensure
the third party exercises cannot be greater in scope
than would've been required
of the defendant if the defendant had been
fulfilling the duty of care.
Uh, for that reason, we will start
as the appellant has this morning
with the ordinary duty of care.
And our starting point is to take up, uh, some observations
of the court this morning, uh, consistently with
a matter which your honor, justice Jago raised in bird
around paragraphs 2 55 to six in relation
to the nondelegable duty that it's critical to define
with precision, uh, a number of aspects of the duty.
And could we take your honors to Brookfield Multiplex,
which is in our supplementary materials
At Case 1 2 54 CLR 180 5 at paragraph 19,
where your Honor, the Chief Justice said,
uh, picking up,
I'm sorry, paragraph 19 is Chief Justice French picking up
what the court said in Sullivan and Moody
and perhaps more, uh, clearly what Your Honor,
the Chief Justice said at paragraph 1 69 that the duty
of care at common law is a duty of a specified person
or person within a specified class
to exercise reasonable care within a specified area
of responsibility to avoid specified loss
to another specified person
or person within another specified class.
Now, if one applies that test, firstly
to the, to the pleading and to the duty that's been found,
and then secondly to this morning's reformulated duty,
your honors can observe these points.
The pleaded duty
is in at page 10 of the appellant's further materials,
and it suffered a number of
defects, uh, under that duty.
Uh, the duty o is the diocese.
The persons to whom the duty erode are the plaintiff
in a capacity as a child said to be in the care of one
of the priests of the diocese.
And then it's a duty to take reasonable care to avoid
plaintiff's suffering foreseeable
and not insignificant harm.
So the most obvious defect with that plead
of duty is there's no identification of the kind of harm,
which is the subject of the duty.
And there's also no clear identification of what is the, uh,
area of responsibility within which the duty is owed saved
for the reference to child in the care
of one of the priests.
None of those problems are solved by paragraphs 34
or 35.
And in turn, those problems flow through to the issue,
your honor, justice Edelman raised about the pleading
of this as a nondelegable duty,
because while 34 asserts
that the 33 duty was nondelegable, it doesn't frame it
as a duty to ensure that
reasonable care was taken in any identified respect.
And if your honors come to paragraphs, uh,
36, that's about content of duty, 30 seven's about content
of duty, and 38 is about
what a reasonable person in the position
of the diocese would've done by way
of reasonable precautions.
And there's nothing alleged about what the delegate
did by way of an alleged failure of reasonable care,
which could have resulted in the diocese being in breach of
a non-eligible duty.
Well,
Apart from sexually assault the plaintiff,
that was the breach, sorry, your Honor.
On the, on the Nondelegable case,
the breach was sexually assaulting the plaintiff.
That is one of the, the problems
because a nondelegable duty is a duty to ensure
that reasonable care is taken, uh,
to avoid an identified harm.
Now, you cannot collapse that into saying a duty to ensure
that no sexual assault occurred,
because then you make the very error.
The Chief Justice Gleason pointed it out in Lapore
that you have turned it into a duty to achieve a result
that no sexual assault occurs.
I understand you're about scope,
but you said there was no breach ident, relevant breach,
and I thought in the area of non ible duty,
the breach is the very act. We're talking about
Your honors. That's one of
the fundamental problems
that hasn't been addressed this morning about the
Civil Liability Act.
Um, I, I'll mention the point now,
but develop it this afternoon, one of the critical features
of the original Civil Liability Act, part one A,
which was introduced in 2002, was that it
sharpened any doubt there may have been about the
distinction between intentional wrongs and negligence.
The whole of part one A is about negligence.
Negligence is defined in Section five as failure
to exercise reasonable care and skill.
Perhaps I'll ask you honor to go to it now,
but section three, capital B made perfectly clear
that, uh, the act does not apply
to civil liability in certain areas.
The first one, paragraph A being of a person in respect
of an intentional act that is done by the person with intent
to cause, uh, uh,
injury or death, or that is sexual assault
or other sexual assault,
the whole act does not apply other than part one B.
Part one B came in as part of the 2018 amendments.
So what was there from 2002 was the sharp distinction
between intentional wrongs,
which are not, uh, regulated.
And then part one A,
which is about the heading is negligence,
and it is about negligence in the sense of the failure
to exercise reasonable care and skill.
And part section five A makes clear, it applies
to claims in negligence, however framed,
and then part section five B, which is headed duty of care,
this court has pointed out that's a misnomer.
This is about breach A person is not negligent unless,
and then we have the statutory formulation
of Yang Shire Council and shirt.
So if a nondelegable duty is an aspect of, uh,
the tort of negligence, which we say it is,
the Civil Liability Act requires that the analysis
of that tort be done through the prism of part one A, where
the negligence stage
of the analysis will be done under the section five
B principles.
And everything else in this part will apply, including,
for example, uh, uh, five
QA
Non a non, I'm, I'm not sure what it means
to say a nondelegable duties an aspect
of the law of negligence.
The, the, the content of a nondelegable duty
must depend surely upon what it is that
what responsibility was assumed.
If the responsibility
that was assumed was an absolute responsibility,
irrespective of any failure of reasonable care by a priest
or any other person, then there's going to be liability
because that's the promise or the undertaking that's made.
I, I agree in part with Your Honor,
but importantly, not in part the concept
of a nondelegable duty is most commonly seen as part
of the tort of negligence,
but that is not the only place in which the concept
of non delegation may emerge.
So the court's referred to Morrison Martin, which is
where in the concept of bailment, it has some purchase.
And in the concept of bailment, the first step is
what is the scope of duty of the bail law?
And because the bail law's duty traditionally was not just
to exercise reasonable care,
but to protect the goods from theft
and depredation, that being the primary duty
one then asks, is it nondelegable?
And if it is, that then has consequences for the action
between Bailor and Bailee.
So Bailment is one area where it can have that purchase.
Another area might be occupier, an invitee onto property.
The case before your honors is about
how can non al duty be deployed in the tort of negligence.
And what I'm seeking to point out,
which has not been addressed, uh, by Lapore
because this came in effect
after Lapore, is that a provision like five Q
has expressly directed itself to this question.
Five Q is in the appellant's notice of appeal.
And what it says is that if the extent of liability in tort
of a person for a breach of a nondelegable duty to ensure
that reasonable care is taken in carrying out a task,
delegated, et cetera, is to be determined
as if the liability were the vicarious liability
of the defendant for the negligence
of the person in performance of the task.
And we'll, we'll give your honors
after lunch the extrinsic material where it was explained.
What this was trying to do, what it was trying to say was
because part one A is going to regulate the whole
of ne the tort of negligence from which intentional torts
have been excluded.
To the extent people wish
to use non delegatable duty within negligence,
this is the way they'll have to do it.
Namely, there will have to be negligence by the delegate,
measured by the Section five B principles,
and then the principle duty hour
will be rendered liable
as if it were vicariously liability
liable for that negligence.
So come back to you honor, justice
recent, can I just finish?
It's a, sorry, your Honor. It's a long way
of answering Justice B Jones' question
that if you're using non-eligible duty in tort,
you still need to identify the negligence of the delegate
for which you then have to say were treated
as if it were vicarious liability.
Well, I don't know that that's, that you started off
by saying that was common ground, that there had
to be an identification of the duty first.
I did not understand Mr.
Hertzfeld submissions to be put on that basis.
So that's the first thing I'd say.
And I may be wrong about that,
but that's not how I understood it to be put.
I understood there were two pathways to his argument,
But if, if, if that's not common ground,
I thought he agreed with that.
But if it, if it's not, I'd say to your honors
that the passage in Hollis
and bu of this court, I took you to
Chief Justice Brennan in Northern sandblasting, um,
new South Wales Court of Appeal, justice Giles,
and I'll take you to additional authorities
after lunch, establish that
a nondelegable duty is an aspect of the scope of a duty
of care which otherwise exists in accordance
with ordinary principles.
Well, that's a different proposition.
If you're saying in terms of determining what, whether
or not there's a nondelegable duty, one has
to identify, as I put to Mr.
Hertzfeld, both an entrustment of someone for some purpose,
IEI as a parent entrust my child to use the school
with the basis that they, you, you'll ensure care is taken.
And if care is not taken, then there's liability.
If that's nothing more than what
you're saying, then I understand that.
But if it's more than that, then I
don't understand it. Well,
It is more than that. I'm
saying certainly that to the extent we're in NDD,
you do need the two elements, your Honor put,
you need the entrustment
And the Acceptance to the duty and the acceptance.
And our short answer to the whole of NDD apart from report A
is you do not have findings of either that entrustment
or acceptance from the primary judge.
You don't have them from the Court of appeal.
You can't repurpose findings made for different reasons
to achieve that end.
And if you go to the evidence, it doesn't get there anyway.
So that's the reason why the NDD case,
I, I understand that that's one case submission,
But I'm putting the anterior submission,
The anterior submission I do not understand at the
Moment. Okay, so the anterior submission
is that a,
a nondelegable duty has been seen in the law
in respect to different torts.
It's most commonly seen in relation to the tort
of negligence, but it's also seen in relation to bailment.
And it has also been seen in, for example, the aspect
of an occupier invitee, I'll come to
that Bernie Shire Council,
but to the extent it is used in negligence, it is an aspect
of the scope of the duty of care which
otherwise exists.
And so the first question in negligence becomes, uh,
do you have the conditions for a duty of care?
If you don't, that's the end of the case.
If you do, then you ask whether those conditions
exhibit the additional features, the elevated features
of entrustment and acceptance
of responsibility in which event it becomes nondelegable.
Therefore, not just a duty to take care,
but to ensure care is taken.
Thank you. Now,
and so the link of that into section five Q is
that if we are using nondelegable duties in negligence,
the parliament has said the way
that it must be done in order to, to preserve the integrity
of the distinction between the tort of negligent
between negligence, however framed
and intentional wrongs, is that you look for negligence
of the delegate in the performance of the work under five B,
and then you treat it as if the,
the primary duty o ahead of a carist liability.
So your honor, justice speech Jones, to complete my answer
to the question, if you were to look at the notice
of intention,
which is in the core appeal book at
page 1 1 11 to 1 1 12, paragraphs two
and three were two of the notice of contention in the,
in the court of appeal.
Yes, they were the appellant's two attempts to frame
that the non-eligible duty, which
they said the primary judge should have found,
and we submit neither of them
adequately frames what could be a, uh,
potential non delegatable duty,
even assuming an ordinary duty of care had been assumed.
But we're now looking at the note
that we got this morning, and it seems pretty
clear that that's a negligence
Duty. And, and when
Your Honor comes to the note,
it's pretty clear it's a negligence duty.
And, and just before you adjourn, you'll see the shifts
that have occurred from the pleading
and from the primary judge's finding at paragraph 2, 2 4.
Firstly, it's any foreseeable personal injury.
It's not limited to sexual assault.
So in the pleading it was any injury, now it's any
personal injury, but that doesn't capture the kind of harm
that was an issue, which was sexual assaults.
That's the first problem with it. Well, it does capture it.
It's just wider. It's wider, yeah, it's wider.
And so you,
you've heard nothing this morning on reasonable
foreseeability in respect to injury of any kind.
What you've heard is injury about sexual assault so
that it's too wide in that respect.
Then it is two children, Mr.
Herzfeld confirmed in answer your Honor, justice Gleason,
that's children of any age, zero to 18.
He's also said it's children of the Catholic faith in full
or in part or other religions, or no religions at all.
So it's any children of any kind.
Then he says, invited onto diocese and premises.
So it's no longer
as per the pleading entrusted into the care without limit,
it's now become invited onto the esan premises.
Then it's caused by the conduct of priests at the premises.
So if we're narrowing it down in that way,
the scripture classes in the school
are not part of the duty.
Attending the mass, frequently
or not, is not part of the sphere of responsibility.
We're down to the invitation to the presbytery,
and we've got two major problems left with the duty,
which I'll deal with after lunch.
Firstly, the evidence did not support
a reasonably foreseeable risk of sexual assaults
occurring in the presbytery or otherwise.
But secondly, the concept of invited,
which is in paragraph two as explained this morning, is
that the diocese armed the, the parish priest
or a person in the position of a parish priest
with an unlimited authority to invite people
to the presbytery for any purpose
that the priest thought fit.
There's no finding to that effect.
And the evidence of Father Dylan was directly
to the contrary to that proposition.
And so finally, your honor, justice Gleason, all of
that is supposedly the ordinary duty of care.
As I heard Mr. Hertzfeld, what he said was that
you would then reframe this for the non-eligible duty
of care by changing some words in the first line,
but you would otherwise continue it on in the same fashion.
No, please court, Mr. We'll finish today, won't we?
We're doing everything we can to finish,
I think on the current agreement.
Mr. Hertz's got a not long in reply, but three minutes.
He's got three minutes. There's a lot to cover, your honor.
We, we will, we will resume at two o'clock and we'll finish
All stand.
The high court of Australia will resume sitting at 2:00 PM
Silence all stand.
The high court of Australia is now in session.
Please be seated.
Yes, Mr. Gleason, uh, you honor Justice Gordon in relation
to the question about proposition two on our outline,
apart from Holliston bu that we've cited
the footnotes in Holliston bu at paragraph 27,
uh, are important,
and they include a case we've given to your is Jones
and Bartlett, 2005 CR 1 66
at 2 2 8, paragraph 2 1 7, where
Justices, Gamo and Hane make the point that Hol
and Babu, uh, in turn makes.
Can I return then to paragraph three of our outline?
And I was at the stage of going through the elements of the
alleged duty as it's now been reformulated this morning,
and giving our response to the reformulated case.
And the first substantive response we have is that,
uh, the specified duty o must be the diocese
that is this diocese.
And we submit that the primary judge, uh,
and certainly the appellant in its written submissions,
perhaps less so today, alighted
between the diocese's knowledge
and that of clergy members generally.
If I can go to the primary judge to three
critical findings, which we say reveal the error
that the Court of Appeal correctly pointed out.
The first is paragraph 231
Core Appeal Book 60.
And in that paragraph, her honor said
that when certain matters were considered together with
Father Dylan's evidence about the awareness,
which bishops plural
and other senior members of the church, that's apparently
the Catholic church generally then that is in 1969,
had about risks, which its priests, uh, whose priests,
supposedly priests of the church generally could pose
to children given the complaints which they had received.
That is bishops
and senior members of the church generally
not widely known in the community.
I'm satisfied the diocese say the duty of care.
Now, there was an attempt this morning to say that, uh,
her honor didn't really mean what she said.
Literally what she meant was she was drawing an inference
that because Father Dylan had deposed
to generalized knowledge of high level people
across the Chap Catholic Church,
she was drawing an inference that Bishop Toy
in Maitland in 1969 had the relevant knowledge
that is simply not an available reading of that paragraph,
nor in the two places where her honor returns to this
critical theme, does her honor suggest she's engaging in any
such process of inference C paragraph 2, 4 9
and paragraph 2 5 1.
And so Justice Leming in the Court of Appeal
and agreed in by the Chief Justice
and Justice Ball were perfectly correct to say
at paragraph 200
and, Uh, three,
or sorry, perhaps 207, that
her honor was not confining her analysis of duty
to people within the geographical diocese of Maitland.
That was an app appealable error.
But can I come to the second aspect of it, which is,
what did Father Dylan's evidence stand for?
And you haven't been given all of
that evidence this morning,
and I want to take your honors to it in some detail.
So if you could go first to his reports,
which were in the appellants materials commencing at page
4 38
at one point, picked up by the Court of Appeal,
but not her honor, apparently at 4 38,
uh, in terms of the experience of Father Dylan,
which he says is 55 years C Letter Q.
If one goes to his CV at page 4 44,
uh, he's, uh, clearly enough a Victoria, nothing wrong about
that, of course, uh, born in Victoria,
studied in Victoria, ordained in Victoria in 1969,
so right on the cusp of the alleged time
for which knowledge is critical.
And then as one might expect, he, uh,
spent 15 years
as an assistant priest in parishes in Victoria, graduated
to a parish priest in Victoria in 1985,
retired in 2002,
and continues to perform, um, certain important functions.
So what, uh, the Court of Appeal
correctly pointed out at paragraph
210,
which is a glossed over by the appellant, is
his statement, which was expressed in terms
of a likely exception.
So it's a most hesitant expression of opinion
Was in respect to the knowledge of some people.
He never identified who in positions
of high authority in the church.
He never identified which positions in which part
of the church, in which state of Australia,
who he says would've been aware of complaints.
And as the Court of appeal correctly says at 208, he's not
to be regarded as an expressing an opinion about the actual
or even the likely knowledge of Bishop Toy in 1969
of complaints made concerning priests in Maitland.
He simply does not express that
because he cannot, if that's how his opinion were
to be read, it can be given very little weight.
Uh, he doesn't purport
to be expressing opinion about the knowledge of the Bishop
of Maitland or indeed,
other senior clergy in New South Wales.
And he didn't provide any reasons for his opinion.
So for that second reason, uh, that critical finding
of her honor, uh, at paragraph 231
was correctly found to be an error by the Court of appeal.
Now, just continuing then with, uh, father
Dylan on the other aspects of his evidence
that we're relied upon, and this particularly concerns a
submission put this morning, Uh,
in these terms, that there is a finding,
or you should find that as the parish priest
or functional equivalent on the unsatisfactory facts
of this case, he was given an authority.
This is how it was put in authority to determine, uh,
who attended the premises for whatever purpose he
thought appropriate.
And so it is said that when, uh,
the appellant was invited to the premises,
that was an invitation coming from the diocese,
whereas we would submit it was an invitation coming from,
uh, father Picken.
But let us look at this question of, did,
did the parish priest have an authority of
that unlimited character?
So if you want us go to page 4 46 first,
which is his second report, And you were taken
to letters I to l the Bishop is the ultimate authority
with regard to relevantly the use of premises.
A property cannot be used
for any purpose in any way contrary to the wishes
or the direction of the bishop.
And then for those activities
and uses that are directly part of the church's mission,
the parish priest authorization
and permission would normally be enough.
Uh, any doubt about the matter, you'd go
to the bishop and get his approval.
So a parish priest
or his functional equivalent did not have authority
within the system of the Catholic Church to invite people to
the presbytery for any
and every purpose that the priest thought sufficient.
It had to be something which could properly be considered
to be directly part
of the church's mission. So what do we get that?
Well, what we get is it can't be for something contrary
to the wishes or direction.
And the next sentence, uh, to the extent it's sufficient
to go to the priest, it's where it is an activity
that could reasonably regard it
as directly part of the church's mission.
And then on page four 40, but
Now, I mean, if, if we're talking about attribution,
this is just Jones and Plenty,
it's just being on the milk truck and
and delivering it in a way that might be prohibited.
No, your Honor, what I'm dealing with here is
that I'm responding to a submission.
The first time it's been clearly made is this morning.
Is that as an element of the ju the ordinary duty, it,
it should be seen that
the parish priest was given an unlimited authority
to use the presbytery for any purpose he thought fit,
including in respect to children.
That that's why it was put.
That's what I'm trying to,
that's what I'm trying to respond to.
I'm trying to say, if you look at Dylan,
and I've gotta take you to four
or five places, yes, this is the first bit that that's not
what a parish priest was given authority to do.
But I don't understand the submission to be suggesting,
and I don't think you are even suggesting the submission
saying that, um, the authority
of the parish priest involves abusing children, uh,
inviting children in to be abused. It,
It, it, it doesn't involve inviting 'em in to be abused.
That that's probably common ground.
But where we are differing is to say the parish priest
was not given an authority to choose
to conduct a social function, such as inviting children
for beer and cigarettes with no aspect of any church
event attached to it. What
What about inviting children in
for social functions generally?
No, because I'm if, if Your Honor will bear with me. Okay.
Sorry. Now I've gotta take you to five pieces
of this evidence, and you haven't been taken to it.
It's the problem of this case
where you don't have these findings of fact.
So that's plank one.
You then go to plank two, which is page 4 47, which is
where he says, to the extent that in the sixties
and the seventies, the presbytery might be used
for purposes other than the priest's residence.
The examples that he gives at letter I are
remote from the present case.
They're gatherings of groups of people,
and then one takes that together with his first report.
Sorry, social gatherings is one of those.
So social gatherings. But let me, this is plank two.
Mm-hmm. So let's look at the rest of what his evidence was.
Uh, and then when you come back to his, uh, first
report, uh, at,
uh, 4, 9, 7 question, I,
uh, what was that page answer?
You said four one, that's page four. 4 1, 4, 4, 1. What
We going back to 4, 4 1
Now 4, 4 1 and 4, 4 2 to his first report.
Uh, so he gives, in answer to question nine, question J,
it seems a common answer, uh, to,
uh, certain forms of expectation with young people
of the parish, which appear
to be group activities.
And then, so that's, that's the third plank.
And then getting more specific in answer to question K,
and I don't think you were taken to K this morning.
You may have been personal one-on-one instruction
of young people was not common in those days.
And even less so in the years since, uh,
one-on-one was seen as unwise or imp prudent.
And that's, that's irrespective of any question
of knowledge now about the risk of any form of abuse.
And then in question l, uh, was it permissible for priests
to have adults and children attending in their residences?
Uh, on rare occasions, individual instruction could be given
if a student was preparing for baptism and so on.
But even in the 1960s, having a number, even a small number
of children, bringing them together for a class was seen
as a much more effective way of doing it.
From my personal experience,
I cannot recall ever having an extended length of time
with any individual student for after hours lessons
or personal instructions.
Use of the priest's personal room
or rooms would've been unheard of.
Even in those innocent times, priest was seen if at all,
in a par near the front door.
So once you start to put that plank together, the concept
of the priest taking, uh,
a young person into the private room was completely unheard
of according to Father Dylan.
And then he went further in his cross-examination,
because if you could go please to pages, uh,
5 6 0, uh,
to 5 6 1, uh,
at 5 6 0 line 35, he's asked about,
this is volume two of the Pel? Yes.
Sorry, what line are we, Mr.
Ner line 35, page five 60. This
Is what we were taken to this morning.
You were taken to part of it only. Thank you.
Line 35 is he's asked about
the social gatherings,
and there he explains they're with, uh, groups of people,
and then he's asked line 50, who were the types
of people who would be attending it gatherings.
And then over the page in the main,
it would certainly been adult people there for committees,
parish councils.
And then he's asked the specific question at line 14,
what about social gatherings?
Which involved only unsupervised children?
Well, from my recollection, in most cases with youth groups
and so on, there was certainly
in my early parishes in those years,
there would always be other people around.
Not so much in the sense of supervision for the reason
that we might put these days
because of scandals that have emerged,
but more from a perspective of dealing with young kids.
It's gonna be a handful
where there were more than two or three.
It was sensible to have volunteer parents
or others available to assist.
Question. So is this right, father,
that your expectation was in the 1960s
and seventies, if there were children at the presbytery,
there would be adults over
and above the priest in attendance?
Yes, that would be the case.
And then he is asked about whether
that would be an unwritten rule.
And then this is the final plank at line 44.
He's asked, what about a scenario in which alcohol
and cigarettes were supplied
to children within the presbytery?
Uh, he gives, um, a
Victorian answer
and then says, from the perspective of supplying alcohol
or even consuming alcohol in the presence of children,
let alone supplying it,
and ditto with cigarettes,
that would seem it would be totally full-hearted
and irresponsible.
Um, and then over on page 5 62 out of order
for a priest to engage in it.
Absolutely. Um, out
of order in every possible way. So, but,
But isn't it saying, yes, you have children,
but you should have other adults
and you shouldn't give them cigarette and alcohol, but
But isn't, That's just justice Edelman's
Point. No. Yes,
You do it, but not by this method.
No. What what it is saying is when you take those planks
down, what it, first of all, you do not have, contrary to
what you heard this morning, an unlimited authority
to invite people there
for any social gathering, you think useful.
Your authority is limited to things which can be regarded as
church business, church events, religious events.
Then when you make it more specific, what are church events?
Oh, well, matters that would involve an element of, um,
religious instructions, spiritual guidance, gathering
of a community as the church community,
there's a whole range of things within church events
and social gatherings and movie nights.
It that's in the list it within.
Then you come to the more specific point
that you're then within an environment where
as per children, it's perfectly clear.
You do not have an authority to invite children there
for any purpose you think fit.
You don't have an authority
to invite them into private spaces.
You don't have an authority to invite them there for
a function, which on no view could be considered
to be connected with any church purpose. Is
That, is that enough way
of saying if he had asked his bishop,
may I invite two boys in on Friday night
for a purely social occasion,
leave aside alcohol and cigarettes?
Yes. Just to purely say, the bishop
must invariably have said
No and must have said no.
And he knew the bishop would've said no,
but the bishop would've said, no.
That's, that's what this evidence was of Father Dylan.
And he's, he's their expert.
In your case, it is that this shows that,
that it took place beyond the authority of the diocese
Anywhere beyond the authority of the diocese.
And, and what it gets to is that, your honor,
justice Gleason asked about this,
this duty's gotta be about the relationship
between the diocese and, uh, and the appellant.
This interaction was an interaction with Father Picken.
It was not interaction with the diocese.
And the fact that it occurred on
diocesan premises merely meant that Father Picken had acted
beyond, far beyond any role.
He might have had to be a representative of the diocese.
It still seems a lot to me, like the classic attribution.
Rosen, plenty situation, children
and young persons must not under any circumstances,
be employed by you in the performance of your duties.
A child is taken on the milk truck.
It's still attributed to the employer,
But we're, we're not quite in an attribution situation.
Honor what we are in is a situation where they're attempting
to, to erect either an ordinary duty or a nondelegable duty.
And if for each of those, they're trying to say,
this was the diocese,
But because the scope of the authority Yes.
Of, um, father Picken
included generally social activities
or inviting people, even if children are forbidden from
that scope of authority.
Well, I, I would simply ask, your Honor, when you come
to reread this evidence, a as you will,
and you look at the report
and you look at the cross examination,
you could not get clearer evidence that inviting
children unsupervised to a private part of the presbytery
for a function that could have nothing to do
with baptism confirmation
and so on, could never be considered to be the diocese
of Maitland interacting with this person.
Now, can I show you then, uh, re related to that,
the evidence, and this comes back
to on Justice Gordon's question about
perhaps in entrustment, the, the evidence of, uh, how it was
that he came to be there.
Um, so in the same volume at page 5 0 5, um,
to, to six, um, sorry, what was the reference?
5 0 5 to six. Thank you.
Um, at 5 0 5, line 35,
he was asked did he tell his parents why he was going there?
And he gave some answers about,
he told them something about a a, a youth club, um,
that's at the foot of that page.
But then the evidence changed on page 5 0 6
at lines 15 to 20.
Uh, did they ask why you were going to meet him?
No, he was a priest. And then lines 40
to the end of the page.
Did they ask why you were coming home so late?
No, it was Friday night. We're in high school.
So in other words, he was free to do
what he wished to you do on a Friday night.
Did they ask you anything about
what you've been doing at the Presbytery?
No, not really. So to the extent, um,
we are looking at the relationship between the parents
and the diocese, there was nothing in this evidence to,
uh, support it.
And in terms of, uh, what actually happened on the
commencement of the occasion, I'd refer you to page 4 82,
lines 15, uh, two 40,
where, uh, when he got there, the, the beer
and cigarettes were laid out on the table.
So your honors, the, the, the,
the point I've reached ho hopefully is this within our
paragraph three, that the primary judge err by, uh, not
focusing specifically on the knowledge of the diocese.
She focused more generally upon the, uh,
alleged knowledge of the priest.
She urged, because Father Dylan's evidence
did not provide any sound basis upon which that could, um,
be found.
And then the next point I wanna deal
with is the kind of harm issue.
So coming back to the appellant's note this morning,
Uh, it, it looks like,
and this comes back to your on Justice Beach Jones'
question, by generalizing from, uh, sexual assault
or, uh, assault
and battery into the risk being
foreseeable personal injury,
what this form of duty seems to do, we think
is ask you honors to find today a,
a duty existed in those general terms,
and then any question of the degree of foreseeability of
the kind of harm that was suffered, namely
intentional assault, would be delegated to the breach stage.
So they're seeking to define a duty where, uh, you hold
that, it's foreseeable that if a child is invited into the
presbytery personal injury
of any kind could occur.
And then once you've found that, there's then the question
of, uh, applying
the section five B factors to the harm in the form
of sexual assault now that we submit is,
is the very error which the court has
cautioned against in a series of cases.
We've referred to this in our written submissions,
but can I give you some of them?
The first of them is Tame
and New South Wales, which is in volume five, tab 29,
um, 211 CLR 3 1 7,
uh, in the Chief Justice's judgment
of paragraph 12,
uh, importantly in the judgment of Justice Gamo
and Kirby at paragraph 203,
in that case, it was necessary to identify the class
of injury as psychiatric illness, not just personal injury
more generally.
And in the judgment of Justice Hane at paragraph 2 49,
uh, uh, where his honor
cited Justice Brennan in Haman, that a postulated duty
of care must be stated in reference to the kind of damage
that a plaintiff has suffered,
and in reference to the plaintiff
or class, which the plaintiff is a member.
And so, so
Psychiatric harm there is used in contradistinction
to physical harm, as I
Understand it. Yes. Yes.
And what does sexual
Assault fall into?
Well, I'm responding to a formulation which says, per
personal injury, which would capture all sorts of things.
Indeed. Yeah. So we would say that any,
any acceptable formulation would have to either be the risk
of, uh, intentional infliction of harm by assault
and battery to the person or sexual assault.
Wow. Now, whether the harm then manifests in physical
injury, psychological injury,
that would still be within the kind of harm if,
If you drop a child at a daycare center, you don't expect
that the care will be limited to, um, sex,
preventing sexual assault.
You expect all physical, um, injury to be guarded against.
And, and, and, and what that shows, your Honor, is that
in, in each case, of course, where the duty is stated,
one is looking at the relationship between the
provider and the the person.
And, and one is bringing to account knowledge of
the way in which risks to safety tend to occur in
that environment.
Absolutely. I mean, there has, there has
to be an assumption of responsibility on the one hand and,
and the, the entrustment on the other.
But once you've got that, why would it be limited to,
um, sexual assault?
Well, the, the, because it,
it will link into reasonable foreseeability that I'm coming
to next, but, um,
and this is the point the court appeal correctly made.
We, we are looking at 1969, your honors are being asked
to find what was the assumption
of responsibility in 1969 based on knowledge of
what risks there might be dropping a child
to a childcare center in 1969. But
That's because we're starting to narrow.
You should be, if the, if, if it's a child,
isn't it just an assumption of a risk of physical,
some sort of physical harm?
And then you ask, you don't ask all the types
of physical harm, you just ask that, uh, it's
because the inquiries are much harder if you're talking
about sexual assault, that it kind of helps your case
because then that becomes a, particularly, the,
the foreseeability is much more difficult.
But to take Justice Edelman's case of a childcare center,
you would simply just ask all the various ways
that a child could suffer some sort
of physical harm in that environment.
Well, your Honor, and if you've got a couple, you don't have
to, you don't have to foresee all 20.
Why is that why that could happen?
You just have to have a, you just have a generalized con
conception of that, don't
You? What about psychiatric
harm?
Would there be a, a duty to take reasonable care
to avoid psychiatric harm
of a child at a childcare center back in 1969?
Well, it presumably would've been unheard of
that such such harm would be suffered in 1969.
So to state the duty 55 years
after the event, which was the Court of Appeals point,
with without carefully distinguishing
current day knowledge from knowledge at the time,
I i is an essential part of the process.
And at the stage of duty of care, of course,
you are stating a proposition of law,
not merely a proposition of, of fact at the breach stage
and in a different context, your honor's in mall land, uh,
That was economic loss Be because it was a novel case.
And, and your Honor said in Mallor land,
I'll just give the reference 98 a LJ R 9 56.
It's in the supplementary book at paragraph 1929.
An essential element of negligence is
that the defendant knows the plaintiff, plaintiff a duty
to take reasonable care when engaging in an activity
to avoid causing the plaintiff a particular type of damage
or loss that is reasonably foreseeable.
So at the stage of duty, particular type
of damage or loss that is reasonably foreseeable.
And that's why it's linked to the next question I'm coming
to, which is reasonable foreseeability.
But, um,
before I come to reasonable foreseeability,
so Your Honor understands
where we understand this appeal goes, if contrary
to our submissions you were to find there was a duty of care
as per this morning's note, which we urge you not to do
as a question of law.
Um, a couple of things follow.
Firstly, that is not the duty of care,
which the primary judge found at paragraph 224.
Uh, I'm not here taking a suter
and gun data point on this point,
but it is a different duty of care.
And the second thing is that the inquiry into breach
of the duty was never done by her honor with respect
to this morning's duty.
So that part of the case has not yet been finished.
And the third is that as Mr.
Sheller will show you, in any event,
we had arguments on breach of duty,
which were entertained in the Court of appeal
and have not yet been resolved.
So on any view, breach would have to be
remitted on the ordinary duty of care.
And we think that places us
and perhaps you in a slightly different difficult position
because the submissions I'm now going on
to make about reasonable foreseeability,
we submit a relevant to duty of care.
But I, if you were to adopt Mr.
Hertzfeld formulation of duty, you might delegate all that
and say, well, that's for, that's for breach of duty. Um,
I think I asked if there's a non duty, the breach is in
SEC and is in the sexual assault, isn't it?
That's the, it's the, that is the breach.
Well, If you're at that point
With respect, that oversimplifies it,
your Honor, that's how they put it.
We say it's not quite as simple as that
because you're still trying to work out what is the
insuring of reasonable care by the delegate,
which did not occur, which requires you to attend to
what the delegate did.
And you've got the question whether
sexual assault occurred, Mr.
Sheer is gonna deal with that, that should also be remitted.
But, um, I'll come to this on Lepore,
but there are grave problems.
This is what Chief Justice Gleason said in Lepore, uh,
an intentional assault is in one sense a failure
to take care, but it is far more
than a failure to take care.
It's an intentional invasion
of the other person's security and liberty in their body.
And to say that we will grapple with an intentional assault
and treat it as if it were just a failure
to exercise due care within the Civil Liability Act,
we submit, as Chief Justice Gleason said, is not to grapple
with the wrong, that is before you.
Now, I wanna come back to that, but you honor Justice Speech
Jones, there are still those questions,
but can I I think next, sorry,
I took you off. You were saying 2, 2 4
is different
to the duty as formulated. Yes.
Yep. Because 2, 2 4 says, I accept the, the Pleaded duty,
the pleaded duty had all the problems I started.
So the breach of the Today's duty
has not been found by the primary judge.
In any event, the whole of breach is still part
of the rehearing under Section 75 A where
because the Court of appeal hasn't yet had
to conclude its views on it.
Um, you, you really have to remit it.
Now, we have tried, given, we accept the force
of the Expedition argument, we have tried via the notice
of contention to say if it were possible for you
to finalize everything that would be in
the interest of the plaintiff.
And we've tried to cooperate with that.
But I have to tell you, frankly, we don't think you can deal
with all issues in this appeal.
Le leaving time aside, you, you don't have the advantages
of even the Court of appeal on some of these issues.
There hasn't been a full argument even on breach.
And if you were to drop Mr.
Hertz, Hertz Field's duty this morning, we,
we have an entire argument to give you about why that duty,
um, was not breached.
Because you've then gotta decide what was the true level
of reasonable foreseeability,
and you've then gotta decide
what were the reasonable precautions That the church should
have taken in 1969,
and you've then gotta decide if those precautions
would've made a difference to someone like Father Picken
who on this material was determined to treat the presbytery
as his own play thing.
Now, none of that. We've tried to do our best,
but none of that we think you can actually properly
determine within your appellate function.
Now, can I come to reasonable foreseeability,
uh, and I'll try and deal with it in the,
in the bite-sized pieces that Your Honor,
justice Gordon has, um, encouraged Mr.
Hertzfeld to frame his case in.
He's got his first case, which is, um, his,
his generalized case, that's his Father Picken case, sorry,
his Father Dylan Case.
And, and that I've already
given you some submissions on that.
Well, you attacked that by reference
to paragraph 2, 3 1, isn't it?
That's, that's the paragraph
2 3 2 3 9 2 3 1.
Yes, your Honor is yeah, correct. 2, 3, 1.
Um, and then it's, it's repeated variously.
It's 2 4 9 2 5 1 and so on.
So on that case, uh, uh, on the proper reading
of, of what Her Honor has done,
she has not doing some process of inferring from this, uh,
extremely thin evidence of Father Dylan
to the knowledge of Bishop Toy.
She's just asking the wrong question.
If she were trying to engage in that inference without any,
uh, reasons expressed, justice Leming was perfectly correct
to regard it as not providing any satisfactory basis
for making findings about Bishop Toy in 1969.
So that's the first plank of it.
The second plank is, uh, father
Doran and the attribution argument.
Now, this is the evidence
of Mr.
McClung and it's
important that you, you, you have the evidence
of the actual report
to Father Doran.
So this is in, uh, appellants materials. It's page 3 56.
It's paragraphs nine through two. 17,
17, Sorry, is that correct?
Was 17,
what was read?
Mr. Hertzfeld says 17 wasn't red, that can be checked.
16 red. Okay. Subject
To a evidence Complaint.
Alright, so 16 was red as evidence that he made a complaint.
17. Mr. Hertzfeld says, I accept 17 was not red.
So the highest the evidence went was a complaint
in these terms was made to Father Duran.
Um, so we then look at how Justice Lehman
most carefully analyzed the significance of
that evidence.
Um, and,
and this commences at page 2 1 9 of the Court of Appeal.
And, and, and I should highlight that on this point,
the present appellant does not currently
have a finding in its favor.
It was attempting to get a finding in the notice
of contention below.
So the primary judge rejected this point.
The Court of Appeal rejected it.
So at the moment, you've got both courts rejecting it.
So Justice Leming goes through, uh,
the nature of the, um, material.
Um, at 2 26, he records our submission.
It was not suggested that Father Doran was a senior member
of the clergy, let alone a trustee,
or that he in fact told anyone
2, 2, 7 deals with an irrelevance.
And 2, 2 8 through two 200
and, uh, 40
are the operative reasons that the appellant needs
to find error in, um,
they can be summarized at 2 28.
A mere report to Father Doran did not amount
to an imputation of any knowledge to the diocese,
and secondly, was not established
that Father Doran was under any obligation
to report what Mr.
McClung told him.
So the following reasons of Justice Lehman
bear out those two propositions.
Uh, now, uh, his honor makes the point,
which has not been contradicted today,
that the Roman Catholic Church was and is hierarchical.
The knowledge of each and every priest is not taken
to be the knowledge of the institution as a whole.
So Mr. Zel said, that's the wrong question.
It's asked being asked at the wrong level.
It's the, it's part of the right question,
because what one is saying is if a report was made
to Father Doran as the parish priest, what does
that connote within the hierarchy of the Catholic Church?
And the point being made at two 30, which has not been, uh,
contradicted on the facts, is that,
and this is part of the answer, not the whole of it, Doran,
um, was not the bishop
and was not a senior member of the diocese.
Yes, he was a parish priest,
but no, he did not hold a position in any
of those senior diocese and roles.
So that's part of what we need to bring to account.
2 31 says. So
Two 30 is, is a, is is the way they ran their case below.
YYY yes. They, they ran the case.
They, they had to establish knowledge by the bishop
or a senior member of the diocese.
Um, they did not attempt to say who they were,
but they certainly didn't suggest Father
Duran was amongst them.
So this doesn't answer the whole of their case,
but it, it eliminates one possible plank of it.
He holds none of those senior positions.
Then 2 31, even if he were an employee,
imputation of knowledge would be context specific.
And 2 32 parish priests are not employees.
So that respects what this court has held in Bird,
and there's no reason why in the absence of a duty
to communicate a complaint,
more senior priests should have the parish priests knowledge
attributed to them.
Now, that's critical to the reasoning that there is
an absence of a basis of a duty to communicate
from Doran to the more senior people in paragraph two 30.
Um, Mr. Gleason, just looking at paragraph 35 a
of the amended statement of P claim, it does seem that, um,
on Foreseeability the plaintiff was relying on, um,
knowledge of members of the clergy in the diocese.
Your Honor is correct. They have referred
to members of the clergy.
Uh, the, the point the court of appeals making is, um,
absent of duty to communicate from the level
of the parish priest to the bishop
or the senior priests, then they have failed
to make out that case.
And, uh, your Honor, justice b Jones asked this morning
how this, I think, how this attribution is occurring.
And two answers were given, one tentatively
and one more firmly.
Um, one answer seemed to be that any communication
to any parish priest
of any matter is deemed to be receipt by
the diocese without more, without any duty
to communicate higher,
that we submit at least on the material proven in this case,
would not respect the
hierarchical structure within the Catholic church.
That would mean that we'd have anything known by any one
of the 55 parish priests.
Uh, paragraph 2 32 would be taken to be the knowledge
of the diocese. Does
That mean that if it's a matter of fact, you would have
to lead evidence to prove what,
what, what's, what's missing?
What, what, what's missing is that within the structures
of the organization, there was a duty
on a parish priest to communicate any
and every complaint irrespective of, uh,
whatever assessment the parish priest may have made about
its insignificance at the time.
Mr. Gleason were the, all the people
that are listed in two 30, the diocese
and consultants, the chancellor, the CNO judges
and so on, are they all people that are within this diocese?
In other words, they're all people
that hold their appointments within Maitland, Newcastle.
Yes.
So I understand the yearbook that his honor is referring
to is the yearbook referencing this diocese. So
They're all effectively people who are more senior,
More senior in The organizational
structure to parish priests.
Yes. Thank You,
Mr. Gleason. One way
I, I understood the argument.
Perhaps the only way I understood
the argument being put by Mr. Herzfeld
This morning Was that this attribution arises
through the operation of Section six. Oh,
Yes. So
to, to deal with that.
Um, firstly,
we've checked the reference given this morning, his Honor is correct.
Six oh was not argued, but leave that aside.
It doesn't come through six.
Oh, because six, six oh is on
j Justice Leming in paragraph 2 32
said there was no argument at trial on six.
Oh, we've checked the reference given there was no argument.
So he was correct to say not,
but if, if he, he's also correct on six oh
Body one, Because six oh
does not have this purpose of attributing the knowledge of
people at various points within the
organization to the organization.
It, its purpose is, is far simpler.
The purpose is simply to say that
we've got an unincorporated association,
which under traditional law,
there may be difficulties suing.
We also may have difficulties in the Ellis world
where the assets
of the body are not in the unincorporated association.
They're in the, uh, the separate trustees.
So what we're going to do is
to create a procedural mechanism by which
a proper defendant can be appointed, who will be answerable
for the judgment, will be answerable for
the legal responsibility, will have its assets
at stake, but we will treat it as if
the unincorporated association had in fact been the
proper, proper defendant.
So it's not intended to change any principles of
attribution, which is justice Lemmings point. What about
B? Anything done
by the unincorporated organization is taken
to have been done by the proper defendant.
There's some attribution there, but, but
It, it, it's done by the unincorporated association.
It's, it's not the next step of altering the rules
by which something would be seen to be done by picken
as opposed to done by the unincorporated association.
What, what does the organization mean in this context?
Unincorporated organization means an organization
that is not incorporated.
Okay. What does organization mean here?
I mean, I know what Mr. Herzfeld say.
He'd say every single parish priest.
No, it, it, it's not that. Um,
Does it connote some kind of, um, uh,
leadership position within the organization like a board
of directors, for example? It, it,
It, it connotes the organized structure
by which the Catholic church in this geographical area,
um, fulfills its mission.
And so functionally, it's, it's the equivalent to finding
who are the board of directors.
So the people listed at two 30 would be
the organization that
They would be the people whose knowledge and,
and would be, would be, would be the knowledge
of the organization, would be the
knowledge of the organization.
But to the extent, as 2 32 says there are 55
parishes, there are 200 priests and nuns,
and there's 1200 square miles.
Um, and it's their knowledge, which is then attributed
to the defendant.
It's the two 30 people whose knowledge is attributed,
but it's not, um, where one strand
of the appellants argument goes that anyone within the
55 parishes and 200 priests or nuns I is the organization,
and therefore its knowledge is
then the knowledge of the proper defendant.
So, your honor, chief justice, our short answer is six.
Oh, had it been run, uh, it would be pushed far
beyond its intended procedural purpose if it were to alter
established principles
by which attribution were to take place. It
It, it just picks up established principles.
It's, it, it in effect incorporates, um,
it incorporates the organization.
I mean, even, even the deeming may actually be an
incorporation as such a, a, a with a,
with a different person as profit defendant,
Well approach it as if it were incorporated.
And therefore, SHA Justice Stewart said, what,
what would we would be, we'd be thinking of
with an incorporated body.
We would immediately, um, not be saying anything
known to or done by a member of the general meeting
is known and done by the body.
One would be saying, if it has a hierarchy, which it does
under the Corporations Act, that will help inform whose acts
and whose mind we're looking at. And we
Might pick up some employees
depending on the scope of their duties.
We might a a, a managing director. Oh,
Lower a manager, a regional manager,
Yeah. Yes. I'm, I'm
not limiting it to that,
but yes, you'd be doing it by reason of their position,
their responsibility to the board.
Um, but what, and and their reporting obligations
and their reporting obligations and priests,
Parish priests start to look a lot like executives well
over, over such a broad, huge organization.
Well, well,
you, your honor, well, I'll give two answers.
The, the first is this is the difficulty of asking you
to make findings of fact for the first time in this court.
What, what you will see from the paragraphs I'm taking you
to, and I know there's been some criticism of some parts
of Justice Lehman, but in most of this judgment,
he has done the most thorough job attempting
as he could as an appellate judge.
And the other two judges have agreed with him
to make the best of this necessarily unsatisfactory record.
And he's looked at this, he's got a series of reasons.
And then, uh, the second part
of my answer is then what I was coming to,
which is paragraphs 2 34 through to 2 2 40,
which is, um,
This is of Justice Leming
Of Justice Leming, which, which is whether on the evidence
as led in this case
and within this organization,
there was a duty to pass it on.
So rather than pronouncing at a level
which is really not supported by the specificity
of the evidence of, is there a rule for all parish priests
as against diocese, his honor, look correctly
at the more specific evidence of
what a reasonable person in do position would've
done in 1969.
Um, the plaintiff did not reduce any evidence
that in response to the report of the abuse, father Doran
or some other parish priest would take the matter further.
So pausing there, although Dylan is their expert, um,
unqualified we'd say, but
although he's their expert, they didn't lead evidence from
him on this question, that it was the duty
of a parish priest to pass on.
To the extent he gave evidence,
the evidence doesn't help them.
You see that in 2 35.
Um, then goes into the facts further
and said, if you'd look at what we know as to what passed
between Dora and Mr.
McClung, um, he tended to confirm that,
um, McClung was not asking Father Doran to
expect any further steps to be taken.
And the observations of Lord Neuberger in MAGA
and the Birmingham Archdiocese in 2 37 have resonance
as his honor said.
And 2 39 brings the key issue together.
Now, this is, this is a causation point.
N no, this, this is, this, this is,
um, this is your duty point
About knowledge, knowledge.
This is knowledge as in, um,
So you raised two arguments.
I understand you say the knowledge
is not within the relevant group
of people identified in two 30, neither pleaded or proved.
Yes. So you narrow the group of people,
and in relation to those who fall outside that group,
I referenced these other paragraphs, you say,
even if they had the requisite knowledge,
they're not within the group.
And if they had the requisite knowledge,
they didn't pass it up the line
And, and were not required within the, the rules
and the circumstances of this organization in 1969 on this
body of evidence to pass it up the line.
That's what, so
If you step back from the facts of this case,
and once on your analysis, one would have to plead
and prove who,
which people held the positions you've identified, identify
what their knowledge was, if any,
and if others outside that group had knowledge,
you would have to prove that they had that knowledge.
And either they were obliged by reference to the rules
of the diocese or the church
or some other rule to pass that up, or they did pass it up
Regardless of the rule.
Yes. When we say knowledge, we mean knowledge
of the risk of sexual assault by a priest.
Thank you. Is that what you, is that what you mean
In this context? Yes.
Yes. Which, which we say goes to duty,
But in an alternative world will be an essential first step
in section five B on breach and causation and, and,
and thoroughly essential on causation.
And there was a strand in the criticism in writing
that has not been pressed today, that,
that justice leming focused only on knowledge
of a risk posed by picken.
That's unfair. Justice Leming
was saying you didn't establish on the evidence knowledge
of a risk posed by Picken
or, um, priest generally.
We've given you all the references in writing in that point.
But, but at this, the conclusion of this strand
of the judgment, which you see at two 40 to 2 41,
is they didn't prove knowledge that Father Picken
posed a risk to children.
And that's, um, framed in that particular way
because this is the answer to ground five of the notice
of contention that had started back at, uh, paragraph 219.
So I think that's the second piece of the
knowledge puzzle, which is Father Duran.
And then the third piece is, uh,
the 1954 report of
Father McDon.
So that's at
page 2 96 of the appellant's book.
And you, you read it
and the high point of it is page 2 97, between letters
G two I, It is, uh, uh,
a record that some complaint was made to Bishop Toy in 1954,
which caused there to be discussion between Bishop Toy
and Father Aldon.
Now, as that was put this morning correctly,
it was said that is proof
that an allegation was made in 1954.
One allegation about one priest to
Bishop Toy,
and nothing more is known about that event.
Now, whether taken on its own
or taken together with the other Slender Reads that I've
just analyzed, it is
we would submit unacceptable in principle to erect, uh,
reasonable foreseeability of risk of sexual assaults
in 19 69, 15 years later,
based on one allegation against one priest,
with no evidence of how that allegation was
resolved or what the bishop thought in response to it.
Now, we support what Justice Leming has
said about this at paragraphs 213 to
218, 214.
Uh, we can infer there was a discussion between them.
It's not known what was alleged, not known
what was said reasonable to assume he denied a wrongdoing.
Um, two 15.
That single paragraph in the 1987 report doesn't establish
Bishop to he knew or believed
or suspected one of its priests was abusing children.
Um, and at two 17
and two 18, his honor was alive to the possibility
that you could have a case where, uh,
you had sufficient knowledge of a risk
of priests in general offending to give rise to a duty
of care or reasonable foreseeability.
But this evidence fell short as per paragraph two 18
of proving that a reasonable person in the position
of the bishop would've taken steps on the basis
that every priest was a potential child abuser.
Um, the instances that were given were too slender to reach
that conclusion in 1969.
Now, in circumstances where justice Ball
and the Chief Justice have carefully reviewed the same
material, come to the same conclusion,
we would submit there's no basis for the, for this court
on a question of fact to interfere
with what's in paragraph two 18.
And there's no error of principle in the way in which
the Court of appeal has approached it. Well,
When you're dealing with the, the question
of reasonable foreseeability, how do you, how, if at all,
do you take into account the unlikelihood of a,
a child being alone with a priest
or a child being invited into the Dyson premises? It
It, it's part of why a person in the bishop
or the senior clergy would not even, uh,
reasonably consider these to be serious risks that needed
to be guarded against because the rules are clear.
Children will never be taken into that form of, um,
private exposed environment.
So you have to assume, um, it's reasonably foreseeable
that priests will, um, deviate from that
DD deviate from that.
And, um, this body of evidence in 1969 didn't,
didn't go anywhere near that
Two ad is too highly pitched though, isn't it?
It doesn't have to be that the reasonable person in the
bishop would've taken steps on the basis that every priest
was a potential child abuser.
The Focus at the, at the duty stage is that much is,
is a reasonable, is the existence of a risk of
a priest or a, a proportion of priests.
Yeah, I I agree with that, your Honor.
Yeah, E every is rhetorical there.
It doesn't need to be every,
And it's not whether they would've taken steps.
It's they're aware of the risk.
Well, then I do defend Justice Leming.
I think what he's saying is that, that the risk of one
or more priests of a, of a sufficient number
to be concerned about doing it, were such
to establish reasonable foreseeability.
Therefore, you're into, into a duty.
That's what he's trying to convey.
We only need one, don't we? Well,
It might be the one that's been the subject of the claim,
but that's all you need.
You don't need more than that.
Well, One out of 55. One what?
One priest, one priest outta 55. She's got 55 parishes.
He's got one of an allegation.
That's, I I was gonna say to your honor, one, one,
what we, we've gotta be a little precise, of course, about
what it is in the present case,
which is why Justice Leming analyzed this.
It's no more than from what we know, an allegation.
And it's one allegation with no knowledge of
what then passed between Father McDon
and the Bishop.
Well, it's allegations 2, 9 7,
the first one occurring in 1954.
Uh, I don't, I don't think we can construe that as,
as a statute and say, we know that the allegations
continued between 1954 and 1969.
Oh, this is a document being written in 1987.
Well, I know I'm just dealing, but it could be, I mean,
you might be right in saying it's
allegations about one incident. You dunno,
It could be about one incident, but even if it's more than
one incident, all we know from that is that
something in 1954, we know nothing more about
the incident or about what passed between Bishop Toy
and Father McDon
before he left the diocese in 1969, paragraph 2 1 6.
So we would
submit that when the,
the Chief Justice cautioned at paragraph
12, uh,
that the evidence here was simply too
exiguous and speculative
and not sufficiently strong as of 1969,
he's honor did not fall into error.
So your honors, in terms of our, our outline,
uh,
uh, so I've covered paragraph four
and I've covered paragraph five.
And so the concluding aspect of the ordinary duty
of care is, uh, where the evidence fell in respect to
other factors that is other than
reasonable foreseeability.
And, uh, our submission here is that
on the evidence, the relationship between the appellant
and the diocese was limited in character.
Um, firstly, there were the weekly scripture classes,
uh, but as the duty has developed this morning,
we would submit they are essentially collateral
to the alleged duty of care
because it's no longer a duty to take
care in an unlimited sense over the person.
It's care in respect to inviting someone
into the private aspect of the presbytery.
Um, in, in any event, on the, the school
side of it, we would support what Justice Leming, uh,
said at paragraph 205.
Um, the ultimate decision to,
Uh, allow any religious people into the schools
to give these 45 minute weekly classes lay
with the headmaster or mistress
or the Department of Education.
Um, we don't dispute Mr.
Hertzfeld point that the bishop,
of course has the ultimate control over which
person goes there.
But what that tells us is we are far removed from the types
of cases where a vulnerable person is brought into the
exclusive control of the alleged duty hour.
Uh, in the 45 minutes, the appellant
and Mr. Perry were in the control of the Department
of Education who had delegated a particular function to,
uh, this religious representative as well as of course,
many other religious representatives. So
Well, the, the, the plaintiff was in the temporary care
and control of the priest when he was
Yes. Don't know that.
I'm sorry.
In the presbytery, the child is in the temporary care
and control of the priest. Yeah,
Well, the, the presbytery is the only bit
that we think really matters left in this case
as it's been reformulated.
So I'm just trying to clear away the other,
I'm distinguishing the priest from
The diocese, You, the priest.
Yes. We, we say in the presbytery,
he's in the temporary care
and control of the priest, full stop.
Uh, and in that event, um, it's, it's distant from any
of the factors that would give rise
to the ordinary duty of care.
So I've mentioned the weekly scripture classes, um,
the intermittent attendance at mass, again, we think
that's largely irrelevant as the case is now being confined.
Our point is not that he attended occasionally as opposed
to having the pleasure of attending, um, every Sunday.
The point is that attendance is at mass, whatever they were,
uh, a, a collateral to the issue
that's now been joined about, um,
being under the temporary control
of the priest in the presbytery in any event, uh, again,
in an attendance at mass in the ordinary
circumstances there with his parents.
And so there's no sense in which the priest has, uh,
any form of exclusive control or access over the appellant.
Um, as well as that the evidence was ex exigent
as to whether he in fact came into any contact
with Father Picken on those occasions
when he attended at Mass.
So what that leaves is simply the, the issue
of the presbytery
and the proper characterization as to, uh,
whether he's there under the temporary control
of Father Picken, as we would put it,
or whether he's there, um, as it were
under the control of the diocese.
Now,
Um, So can I just put our concluding
submissions on that topic?
Um, and,
Uh, Uh,
this to some extent overlaps the entrustment question
that I'll come to shortly necessarily.
So in terms of the findings that were made on the topic,
we have the finding at paragraph, uh,
218,
Uh, that the Friday nights father pick
and arrange were not church events.
Now you were, you were cross referred
to the submission at 190.
That's the submission our side made,
which her Honor accepted.
These are not church events.
And together with 218,
What do we get from the Exclamation marks?
Sorry, the quotation marks?
Uh, I, I think it's really there for emphasis
to say a church event could have a fairly wide ambit.
It's not, but it's an event which reasonably would be
understood objectively
and subjectively to be one associated with the mission
of the church as opposed to
Father Picken engaging in his private social events.
But it goes further than that
because if you take it together with, uh, paragraph, um,
229,
which, which you were not referred to this morning, um,
there is no suggestion
that Father Picken invited the boys there
for religious instruction.
So in, in terms of the, the findings that you have
on this topic, uh,
and I should just indicate for completeness, um,
if you compare paragraph 141, um, which,
which is a statement of the plaintiff's evidence at
paragraph nine, her honor has clearly rejected that evidence
that was given by the plaintiff,
One Of the areas where she found, uh, problems with his
credit and
that topic.
So what was that paragraph? We,
your Honor, rejected his evidence?
Uh, paragraph 229. I see.
Uh, and that was a matter which Your Honor,
uh, had explored in argument with counsel at page 698
of the appellant's book.
So it was fully event, it would need
To be, it wouldn't need to be religious instruction.
It could be a youth group.
Ch church events is broader than religious instruction.
Yes. But so we've got both.
So I'm, I'm referring to both
and saying, uh, in, in terms of what was the character
of the event, both those findings would count
against the, uh, finding of a duty.
And then, uh,
as I put to your Honor this morning
before the adjournment, if, if you ask the questions
of entrustment and acceptance, you,
you have an absence of any positive findings
that the appellant would otherwise need from either court.
On those topics was, was there any
Finding made or was there any evidence about
what youth groups looked like in 1969?
Uh, we think not.
But um, perhaps for the reason
that whatever Father Doran was,
father Dylan was speaking of in 1969,
it brought no resemblance to, to this event.
This on no view could this be treated
to be as a youth group. When
You said in entrustment
and acceptance, do you mean entrustment
and assumption of responsibility?
Yes. Yes, yes. So this is the point at which,
although I'm trying to keep them separate, the ordinary duty
of care starts to blend into some
of the discussion under the nondelegable duty.
But what we've effectively got is we've got the findings
of not a church event, no religious instruction.
We've got the analysis of Father, uh, Dylan that I've been
to, and I won't repeat.
The appellant doesn't have the findings it,
it would need on this topic.
And for that reason, um, your honors
would confirm the conclusion of the court of appeal
that the ordinary duty of care, uh, was not established.
Um, now the only thing I wanna say on the question of, um,
parish priest or not parish priest, is in our submission,
it was neither determinative of the Court
of Appeals judgment and is not determinative of this appeal.
Uh, justice Lehman made clear that
his observations were not determinative
of the outcome litigation.
That's at paragraph 80.
What about the first sentence
of just Chief Justice Bell's judgment?
Paragraph 12 one through six.
YYY. So it's one of the reasons he's on a found error,
but it's not, uh, it, it was neither necessary
nor sufficient for the error
because what Chief Justice Bell is agreeing with
is effectively the whole of Justice Lehman's five
or six points which commence from paragraph 200
and uh, two.
And of those points, 203 is the parish priest point.
Uh, 205 is independent.
Um, 206 really doesn't take it very far.
207 and following are the ones
that really matter, which is knowledge.
So, um, if we're correct that
they failed to prove the knowledge case,
that's a sufficient reason to interfere
with the primary judge's decision.
Um, another sufficient basis is
that looking, looking at the duty
as it's now been reformulated,
they don't have the findings they need
and such findings as are there are adverse to it.
And that leaves the question, uh, what
further needs to be done about the parish priest finding,
um, the way I've put it today,
or sought to put it, it wouldn't matter if he was on the
agreement of these parties contrary
to the fact the parish priest,
because that did not alter any of the questions
of authority attribution and so on.
That's the primary way I've put it.
What, so this table that you've provided us with,
We put, we put aside, that's now that's,
you can put aside because Mr.
Hertzfeld has candidly accepted that the finding
that his honor made
that he was not the parish priest is is the correct
finding on the evidence in the case? I
Don't think he made that concession. No, not
At all.
He just said he's not gonna argue
the toss 'cause we shouldn't
Be there. Alright, well, in that event,
your Honor,
please don't put the table aside,
put it the front of your folder if you would.
What, what the table is to show you is to the extent,
as a matter of fact, on the evidence, his honor found that,
uh, the, the true parish priest was O'Dwyer
and this man was the assistant priest, his honor,
correctly analyzed every document.
We've simply given you the references in the bundle,
but we accept that doesn't answer
the, the full point they're making. But the real
Point is why should we, why should
we even look at that document?
Well, can I come to that, your Honor?
But I was asked about the table
and I want to explain why the table's there,
and I wanna do this in three steps.
That's step one. Step two is
to the extent there's a challenge of procedural unfairness,
which is not raised in the notice of appeal,
your Honor should not entertain it
and your honors should reject it.
You were taken to one place this morning where, uh,
His honor, justice Lehman
raised the question with the parties.
If you're making a challenge of procedural unfairness,
particularly outside your notice
and appeal, it would serve you well to be fair to the judge.
Now, I don't wanna lose too much
of my time defending Justice Leming, I'm not his counsel,
et cetera, but the fact is he put this 0.4 times in
argument to the parties.
This is not a judge coming up
with a stray thought in chambers
and then it emerging in the judgment,
his honor put this to the parties.
So can I show you where his honor put the point?
It doesn't answer everything,
but it's unfair to accuse him
of unfairness when he's not being unfair.
Now, if you have the respondent's book of further materials,
and if you go first to page 1 56
foot of the page
And over the page, is it correct that Father Picken
is the parish priest?
Mr. Sheer is actually the assistant
and Justice Leming raises the difference between the two
and he raises some of the evidence.
So he's actually taking counsel to what's in the documents
and at line 28 says, the parish priest seems to be o
Dwyer and Justice Leming says, and Pickens the assistant.
Um, the reason I got to was
that I'd normally understood when you had an assistant
priest, they lived in the same house of the parish priest.
That's not the case though, as they understand it.
So his honor asks in the negative, trying
to seek clarification as to whether
what would normally be the case
for some reason was different.
And Mr. Sheer, um, may say to his credit,
was completely candid with the court as to
what evidence there was and there wasn't.
And the fact was that in a case being run 55 years
after the event, there was no evidence
of fact as to
whether someone else was resident.
Certainly no evidence that there was someone there.
So for our part, whether we can be criticized for it
or not, we said it,
it does look like he is the assistant priest
because of these documents,
but we cannot put an affirmative argument about someone else
being there at the relevant time
because this amount of time later we just don't have it.
So that's the first place.
Then if you go to page 1 75, um,
uh, it's not as if the point wasn't put
to the appellant at lines 20 to 37.
Um, justice Lehman says a great deal
of the evidence suggests there was another adult living in
the presbytery, the actual parish priests.
And Mr. Prince says, well, I think my friend accepts,
there's no evidence that the other parish priest was
present in the presbytery.
Certainly not the time the
assaults alleged to have occurred.
So that's about whether there when the assaults occurred.
I don't think anyone ever suggested there was another adult
in the presbytery at the time.
And he goes on to make some other points.
And then in that context, it's in reply that at page 190,
uh, you are taken to the passage this morning
between Justice Leming and Justice Sheer.
And that passage, Mr. Sheer correctly says, I'm bound
by the admission I've made.
And that's the basis upon which it should be conducted.
Yes. So, uh, this is my step two.
Step two is just to say I, if you're accusing Justice Leming
of a lack of procedural fairness,
you should at least look at the way in which
his honor was troubled by this point
as a judge properly would be troubled on a section
75 a appeal.
All the documents pointed the other way he raised
with the parties, he was concerned about the question
and he raised what implication it had
for whether another priest was there.
And he did it in a context where it was a central plank
of her honor's findings on vicarious liability
that Picken was the parish priest. And,
And he, and he got the final word on the topic was
it's not an issue, we're stuck with it.
And it was left there and then his honor went
and Right wrote a judgment, completely upending it.
It's not a criticism of Mr. Sheer, but that
You can raise it, But if the final word was, was stuck
with the admission and everyone packs
up their books on that basis. Well, I
I I would simply put it this way, in, in defense of
what his Honor did, he has raised the 0.3 times,
he's raised it with counsel on both sides.
It's squarely in the ring
as a matter of troubling the court.
And it was a matter which his honor was then entitled
to compose his best reasons conscientiously resolving
the issues before the court.
And as I've shown you, this was not essential
to the ultimate decision.
And as I understand it, Mr. Mr.
Gleason, nor is it necessary for any part
of your argument in response no.
To Mr. Fel? No,
Just to complete the issue.
I dunno what the position is of New South Wales,
but in the Fed Report there is numerous authority that says
the judge is under a duty to ensure
that an agreed fact is also true.
Yes, yes.
And that's what he was saying to the parties.
Now, um, but
ultimately it's not just positive of this appeal,
your honors, can I come then to Lapore
W was there a third step in your argument?
Uh, If, if if there was the moment's probably passed?
The moment's passed. Alright,
O on the question about youth groups, I've already been
to page 5 6, 1 of the appellant's book,
but that's where Father Dylan confirmed
that there would always be adults
present if there were youth groups.
Now, So
the, the point we have reached,
at least on our analysis is if there's no ordinary duty
of care, the appeal should be dismissed.
If there is an ordinary duty of care, then there needs
to be a remitter to deal with the remaining questions
of breach and causation.
Uh, if there is an ordinary duty of care, then
unless Lapore is, as we would put it, reopen
and overruled the Nondelegable duty of care, uh,
case must fail.
And even if Lapore is reopened
and overruled, there was not a sufficient entrustment
and assumption of responsibility to create a type
of non-eligible duty of care that could possibly extend
to ensure that sexual assaults did not occur.
That's the structure of what we're putting your honors.
Can we, can I ask your honors to open Lapore?
Uh, and I realize Mr.
Hertzfeld was short on time when he came to it,
but it, it,
it does deserve significant attention.
Our, our first submission is, um, your Honor,
justice Settleman put something about the
point not being argued.
Uh, we think if you look at what Mr. Sexton put
at C LR five one, yes,
I've, I've, I've four to five back to
That. I think the point was argued,
Yeah, and, and just let me say Mr.
Keen, in his customary fashion,
put it a lot more succinctly than I could at, um,
at CLR 5 1 7 and, uh, Mr.
Mr. Sway, it was no slouch,
put it pretty well at 5 1 9 at the top.
And, uh, those on the, on Mr.
Hertzfeld side, they put the counter argument pretty clearly
at 5 22, 5 21.
So it's in the ring. We then come to Chief Justice Gleason
and we rely upon paragraphs two
and three as setting up the context of the case
and indeed this case absolutely squarely and correctly.
Because what his honor recognized was that
when you were dealing with the relationship
of the school authority
and the pupil, you were already in the territory
c footnote 61 Modbury, where the ordinary duty
of care required you to take care
or may require you to take care
to protect others from the wrongful behavior
of third parties, even if it's criminal.
So the ordinary duty of care could well respond to
the very situation we are dealing with if there was fault
on behalf of the primary duty owe.
Now, importantly, footnote 61 cites Modbury
at page 2 6 5 in Modbury at
2 6 5, paragraph 26, 1
of the cases cited is Cha Minski.
That's the case that Mr.
Hertzfeld relied upon to say that Lapore
was always misguided
because there were earlier cases
where nondelegable liabilities were found in respect to,
uh, criminal acts.
Cha Minski is no such case.
It's a case which as Chief Justice Gleason says, is one
where the primary duty owe was, was at fault
for failing to take reasonable steps to prevent
criminal behavior by a third party.
So his honor says we're not in that territory,
paragraph three, and we're assuming we're not in the
carious liability territory.
So the question is, does the Nondelegable duty
of care provide
for a duty which is more strict than a carist liability?
It it would be very odd, wouldn't it, to have to be able
to say, well, an ordinary duty of care can extend
to criminal acts.
But if you assume a higher duty, you assume a duty to ensure
that can't extend to criminal acts.
No, your Honor, let me, let me tell you why.
Let me tell you why the very point Chief Justice Gleason is
making is with the ordinary duty of care in the realm
of negligence, we are concerned with fault in terms
of a failure to live up to the standard of reasonable care.
Now, can I just finish Your Honor, can I just finish,
if the risk that I reasonably foresee as in Cha Minski
as in Modbury, is that a third party,
whether they be my employee, my contractor
or an outsider, is, is likely
to engage in intentional criminal conduct, which is likely
to harm my neighbor.
If that's reasonably foreseeability.
And there are reasonable precautions available to me
to protect against that behavior,
and I don't take them negligence perfectly,
appropriately responds and holds me liable.
But it does that because it's made a finding
of reasonable foreseeability
and it's made a finding of reasonable
precautions in response to a case where
that is the known risk.
The point the chief justice is making is if we are in a case
whereas the primary duty oer, I am not at fault.
That is there is no risk that I reasonably could
or should have foreseen.
There are no reasonable precautions I
could or should have taken.
And yet someone who in some way is associated
with my enterprise, has committed an intentional wrong.
Does the law simply say no difference here
between being liable for intentional wrongs
and liable for lack of care?
Or does the law say we are actually responding to conduct
of a different kind qualitatively
and conduct Where to extend that liability is
to make a significant policy judgment.
Because if you're making that judgment,
you're not just making it for Maitland in 1969,
you are making it for all organizations in like situations
who may have people who are not employees,
where you are not at fault, where you now become in effect
strictly liable for their intentional torts.
Now, when he's on a, at paragraph, um, 20
paragraph, um, 36, if you could jump to
that correctly, said, if, if we adopt this principle,
we've gotta say what effect will this be happening on having
on daycare centers?
What effect on clubs providing recreational activities,
what effect on all sorts of other organizations, commercial,
charitable, large or small, religious or secular well funded
or mind, that is a fundamental difference
where one is extending the liability for
what the law normally does not hold you liable for,
for the intentional wrong of another person.
It's a big step to take.
Now, if his honor to recognize that we submit is not
to make a category error, it's not to make a logical error,
it's not to, uh, just miss what is steering you in the face.
It's for his honor to recognize a really significant policy
step, which I've gotta say this to your honor, which
if you open Fleming on torts, the 1965 version
or the earliest version in the 1970s,
your honor's got them all in chambers.
They're great books. You will not find, you will not find
a hint that the nondelegable duty in negligence is a means
to make a person liable
for the criminal acts of another person.
Now your honors are being asked to restate that law.
55 years after the event, you're being asked
to reopen the pore.
You're being asked to, we would say, collapse a distinction
between intentional tort and negligent tort.
And you're being asked to do it.
Most importantly,
and this hasn't been confronted today, the parliaments
of this country following these terrible events
that emerged in the Royal Commission,
have all been grappling with as a matter of law reform,
what steps can
and should be taken, particularly going back into the past
to deal with this wrong.
Now, Mr.
Hertzfeld can say, don't worry about six F,
that's just another cumulative form of liability he told.
Your Honor, we wanna submit
that a fundamental reason why Lapore should not be touched
is that the parliaments in 2018 in partially similar
and partly different fashion,
have directly addressed the problem of Nondelegable duties
and they've chosen to solve it in a particular fashion.
And this court should be very slow to retrospectively
state the law 55 years ago,
inconsistent with the choice the parliament has made.
Now I'm jumping ahead, but time is short.
Can I ask your honors to go to the next part
of the Civil Liability Act?
This is, this is really important. What happened in 2018?
A a couple of things happen if, if you go to
apart from six oh
and the like, if you go to six
D to six F
and this provision is replicated in the Victorian Act,
What happened was in six D,
the Parliament created a statutory
concept of responsibility.
So it provided a definition of what it means
to be responsible, which has elements
of either exercising care, et cetera,
which is a factual inquiry reporting to exercise care.
That's a factual inquiry or is obliged by law to do so.
That's a legal inquiry law, of course,
meaning Australian law, not cannon law.
And if you then delegate any part of that responsibility,
you remain responsible.
And then six E extends the individuals associated
with you to a range of people.
And then what six F does is imposes a duty of care
that forms part of the cause of action in negligence.
So functionally it is the same thing as a nondelegable duty
because the scope of the primary duty
now includes this statutory duty.
And subsection two gives you a responsibility, uh,
if you've got a responsibility for a child,
you must take reasonable precautions to prevent
and individual from perpetrating child abuse in
connection with responsibility.
And then what the Parliament has done, this is the first
of the two critical choices in sub three,
is there's a reverse onus.
There's a presumption of breach
unless the organization can establish it took reasonable
precautions to prevent the child abuse.
Now, as Justice Leming recognized the paragraph 1 68,
if you restate the law in 1969, as the appellant seeks,
you'll be doing so inconsistently with six F
because instead of the organization having the chance to
raise the defense and defeat the presumption,
it will be liable anyway.
Now, parliament in New South Wales
and Victoria made that choice
and they combined with it a choice
for which they're responsible to the people, uh,
which you'll see in the schedule at,
uh, clause schedule one, clause 43,
that it is only in respect to child abuse going forward.
Now in an area where the parliament has grappled
with the very problem, has chosen to do it in a way which is
not as, uh, strict as an NDD
and where has deliberately said,
we make this change going forward, we submit,
there is the most compelling case for you
as the ultimate custodians of the common law.
Not to go back
and say, we will restate the law in 1969 in a way no one
could have known of in 1969,
but that's the first step of it.
The next step, which you haven't been taken to so far,
but is critically important, is six H.
Now your honors, I don't think were taken to six H in bird
for the good reason that in Victoria
there isn't at the moment a six H.
And what six
G and six H does is directly address the bird problem
by creating a statutory precarious
liability in addition to the common law, which extends
the liability from an employee to
individuals akin to an employee.
The very argument you heard
and rejected at common law in Bird,
and then six H imposes the vicarious liability.
And if you read the terms
of the vicarious liability in subsection one, um,
they are the very terms which are taken by the parliament
from this court's decision in Prince Alfred College, six G
and H six G and HSG, yeah, six G and six h and h.
The the terms of the vicarious liability are the Prince
Alfred College terms of vicarious liability.
And if I can take you to what Mr.
Speakman told the parliament they're attempting to do,
which is in volume nine, at, uh,
at page 2 3 5 0
to 2 3 5 2.
This is tab 55.
Yes, at the foot of 2 3 5 0, he explained
what six F was doing
and he explained this was recommending the Royal
Commission's recommendation to shift the onus.
Uh, but he said at the second last paragraph on
page 2, 3, 5, 1 in the middle that it was prospective only.
So that's the deliberate parliamentary
choice prospective only.
And then in the second half of that second half paragraph,
he switches to new division three.
That is what's now six G and six H.
And he says, it'll codify the common law
of vicarious liability for child abuse perpetrated
by employees, extend it to those who are akin to employees.
Again, its perspective only then he explains the history
and what he says is the New South Wales parliament was
expressly responding to that separate recommendation
of the Royal Commission that there be a nondelegable duty
of care on institutions.
No one has done it to date.
He says in at that time the carers liability in
NDD was unclear.
Since then, this court has decided Prince Alfred College,
the court outlined the correct approach
to an organization's vicarious liability
for child abuse by an MP employee.
The court provides a legally stable basis on which
to implement the intent
of the rural commission's nondelegable duty recommendation
that provides section six H six H
uses the language from Prince Alfred College
and extends it to those akin to employees
to close the, the loophole
which the court dealt within in bird.
So what has happened, you, you gi given
what this court has said in more recently about Nondelegable
duty, you might regard it as a, uh, uh,
and an impure way in which to recommend
implement an NDD recommendation.
But the choice of the New South Wales parliament is
that the way to grapple with the NDD problem is
through vicarious liability,
but extending it to persons akin to employees
using the Prince Alfred College formulation of what is
within the liability and what is without.
And to do that prospectively, now it's hard to think
of a case where this court has been asked not only
to overturn a case that stood for over 20 years
to alter fundamental distinctions between intentional
and negligent torts
to restate the law 55 years ago when you've got the
parliament grappling with the very problem
addressing the problem,
but doing it in what it considers to be the correct fashion.
So we would urge you to have the greatest of caution.
Can I just ask, uh,
these provisions replicated anywhere else?
That's, that's the next bit, your Honor.
Victoria did not have this provision in when you,
when you considered birth.
If you go to our, that is the respondent's supplementary
material, further booking material at tab,
uh,
at tab
at tab seven, there's a current bill
before the Victorian Parliament to
introduce an equivalent provision to six G and six H.
There's a proposal in that bill,
uh, in clause 93 H
that it would be retrospective unlimitedly.
That bill is still on the table
of the Parliament in New South Wales,
But That was, that has a retrospective operation
as well as prospective.
And, and my, that's my point.
What's happening is the parliaments, they've done
what they've done to date New South Wales, we would submit,
has, has taken two steps.
Victoria's taken one step at the moment.
Each of them are non retrospective, quite intentionally.
What's on the table for Victoria is potentially, uh,
that this one be retrospective to complete the picture
for New South Wales, which is tab eight.
So which, which book are you in
When you tab eight, which, uh, sorry, I,
I I'm in something called respondent's for the bundle
of Authorities not Materials.
Oh, I see. Sorry. That's the role.
So what's happening in New South Wales?
There's a bill tab eight, the effect of which would be
to amend the non retrospective clause i I told
you about, which would make New South Wales also,
uh, go back in time.
And then as to what's happening, you'll see
that best from tab nine, which is
that the New South Wales bill was introduced by the,
the government, But the government ended up
currently voting against it
for the reason given in the first paragraph
that there's ongoing work being conducted
through the Standing Council of Attorneys General
and they're wanting to, uh,
see if they can produce an Australia wide response.
So for that reason, the New South Wales bill on the last
page, um, was defeated on the second reading speech.
So the end result is you, you've got, you've,
you've got Parliament addressing the
problem in various ways.
You've got Parliament's currently looking at the problem,
including the very question of retrospective.
You are being asked to restate
what we would say is the law on the same topic
in a radically different fashion and you shouldn't do it.
What if, what if Parliament is responding to what is
presently, uh, the law on non delegatable duties
on a mistaken assumption
that it's narrower than it should be?
And, and, um,
and Parliament then narrows what ought
to be the law to create a position which, um,
Your Honor should not restate the law 55 years ago in a
way no one could have foreseen at the time on that sort
of reasoning I'd submit this is the most,
the most compelling case
to leave this matter where it belongs. Now this
Is all directed to one particular species of liability.
Child sexual abuse, Lepo
and Bird both have application beyond
a particular focus of these bills.
That's correct. Uh, so bird won't
whatever might be perceived to be the problem with bird, if
that's perceived to be a problem, that that's not a
beyond the particular context that won't be addressed
and whatever might be seen to be the problem with the poor
beyond this particular context won't be addressed
by these bills no matter what happens.
That's true because they're all, is that right? Yes.
So, but We, but we just sort of stay our hand and wait
and see how bills unfold over time.
No, your honor. I'm putting this
at the more fundamental level.
Um, you, you're being asked
to overturn a solid case that stood for a long time.
I've only got to the first two paragraphs of the case.
You've got all the John's factors as
to why you should exercise the greatest of caution.
We've put that in writing. There's no
time to develop that orally.
I'm just showing you extra material,
which is you're being asked to do it for a reason
in a particular context.
If someone wants to change the law of nondelegable duty
in a non-sexual assault context, you exercise your restraint
by waiting until that matter comes
before you, you don't do it
because this case, which is sexual
assault, gives an opportunity.
Now, can I just go to some other aspects of Lapore?
Um, I've dealt
with the way the chief justice set up the, the, the problem.
And if you could go to paragraph 22,
He, his honor said that the first step was
to identify the extent of the obligation
that arises outta the relationship.
Um, and the fact that it's,
it may be delegatable does not transform it into a duty
to keep workers free from all harm
makes the same point at the bottom of 23.
Uh, at 31, he makes the point that, uh, intra viney
was a case involving negligence by the delegate.
And he says, a responsibility to take care for the safety
of another or to see that reasonable care is taken
for the safety of another is substantially different
for an obligation to prevent any kind of harm.
Although it involves a failure to take care,
it involves more.
And if you are to extend liability, the court should face up
to the fact that is the consequence of what
is being sought.
Uh, I've taken you to 36
and then I wanna take you, if I might,
to Justices Gamo and Hane.
Now,
Importantly at, um,
2, 2 4, 1,
their honors explain why Morrison Martin might be regarded
as a different sort of case.
We would say on Morrison Martin that it's been interpreted
by this court sometimes as vicarious liability, sometimes
as Nondelegable.
That's understandable because Lord Denning was more
of a nondelegable man,
and the other justices were more
of vicarious liability meant.
But our critical point is even if you're treated
as a Nondelegable case, what it is saying is that
because in Bailment there has always been the higher duty,
then the Nondelegable folds in behind that higher duty
to say that if you do have a duty
to protect the goods from theft, you cannot escape the duty
by giving the goods to a servant who chooses to steal them.
But that's a function not of its nondelegable.
It's a function of the higher duty which has
been recognized in Bailment.
Um, now if you look at paragraph 2 45,
their honors carefully distinguished between
the two different senses in which ensure reasonable
care might be understood.
Uh, and the, the lesser sense is the one we contend
for the higher sense, which was what was argued for, was it
was to ensure that the person was not harmed by any act
or omission of those who actually have charge
of the child, which is effective.
The way your honor, justice Peach Jones was putting
to me an argument the NDD would work,
then they trace the history of it,
uh, at 2 54.
They come to the cases in the high court on it, 2 55,
they identify the categories
and in 2 56 they make the important statement,
which has not been contradicted, which is
that in all the cases in which non-eligible duties have been
considered in this court, there've been cases in which the
plaintiff was injured as a result of negligence.
So this is important in understanding that lapore
historically is sound because all the non-eligible duty
cases have been ones in which the plaintiff was injured
as a result of negligence.
Which leads to the question at the end of 2 56, should you
use the NDD principle to extend liability
to deliberate criminal conduct of a teacher,
which constitutes a trespass.
And, uh, there's then some, um, further discussion.
But the court ultimately gives the judgment,
ultimately gives four reasons at 2 65
and following why the law should not be extended
to include responsibility for intentional defaults
by delegates.
Now, the the first reason is
that you would be converting the tort
of negligence into a duty to bring about a result, um,
that no person, uh, engaged to take steps connected
with the care of the plaintiff,
did anything to harm the plaintiff.
And as per over the page,
that would sever the duty from its roots in the law
of negligence, it would make the employer the insurer
in this circumstance.
Now, that first reason we would say is now strengthened
by the conceptual distinction in the
2002 Civil Liability Act.
I've been to 2 6 7.
The second reason, it would remove any need
to consider whether, uh, the primary duty TO could
or should have done anything to avoid the harm.
Um, the third reason 2 6 9 is that it would, um,
jar with vicarious liability.
Now that third reason can now be strengthened by the 2008
18 act that I have taking you to,
it can also be strengthened by this court's decision in Bird
because the effect of bird is that
if you are an employee, you may be you,
you may lead to vicarious liability within the limits
that the court has set in Prince Alfred College.
But if you're not an employee,
there will not be vicarious liability for the principal.
This new NDD principle effectively cuts across, across that
by extending what is in substance the same liability
to people who do not count as, uh, employees and,
and perhaps more troublingly, uh,
if a person is an employee, uh,
but they're acting outside the course of employment,
which was the issue dealt with by your I Justice Gleason in
that case, um, and
therefore not liable under vicarious liability,
the principle may now become liable
because of the larger scope of what non delegatable duty is.
So that's a conflict there.
Um, the fourth point, which is, sorry,
but wouldn't the course of their employment
define the scope of the duty?
No, no, that's, that, that, that's part of,
that's part of the problem.
The, the course of the employment is looking at the
relationship between the primary duty owner
and the employee.
If, if NDD is allowed to sit over the top of that,
we are looking at, in the first instance, the task assumed
by the primary duty owe to the beneficiary.
And we are then asking whether, uh, a relevant part of
that task was delegated.
And in the course of the delegation, um,
a relevant wrong occurred.
The two are not, the two are not co-terminus at all, but
You would expect that to be narrower, that,
that the boundaries of the nondelegable duty are the
task that's undertaken.
Whereas in the vicarious liability concept, you would extend
to torts that occurred in the course of the employment.
Your Honor, when we read Fleming in
1965, he made that point.
You'd expect the NDD to be narrower in that way,
but it it may also be broader, particularly on,
um, depending how the facts of the case occur.
Our, our main point is that you,
you are creating the potential for a jarring with
that precarious liability there.
Honors final point is Williams and Milton,
and this is where they differ from Justice McHugh.
But on our reading of Williams
and Mullo, even under the old forms of action,
it does not authorize pleading a trespass as negligence,
although it may authorize the reverse.
But the critical thing now is the Civil Liability Act has
explained those distinctions are
even clearer than they might previously have been.
Uh, your honor's my final submission is, uh,
paragraph nine of the outline.
Um, which is that
even if Lapore was overturned, um,
based on the factual matters I've been to, uh,
you would not find that there was a relevant entrustment
and a relevant, uh, assumption of responsibility so as
to give rise to a nondelegable duty.
Your honors, can I hand over to Mr. Sheer? To
Mr can I ask you just quickly one question just about
what you first started with.
Are you submitting one way
or another whether this case
is falls within three B one A?
That is, it's a civil liability of a person in respect
of an intentional act so that it, it's it's not covered
by part one of the Civil Liability Act, but is by part one B
or is that, that's not part
of your case one way or another. Could
Could you just give me a moment so I can
be accurate on that?
Because I wasn't, I can't recall
'cause I didn't look at damages, so I can't recall
how this was run at trial on that basis.
Can I just check that while Mr. S
Mr. Gleason, can I just
ask you one other related question?
And that is, is is part of your earlier submission to say
that the definition of negligence in section five
of the Civil Liability Act,
it it necessarily excludes a deliberate
Criminal act? Yes.
See, Can
I, can I just add one short Question to that,
Which is that, sorry.
The, the reason being part of the I reforms was designed
to say that we're gonna really tighten up
negligence in the sense of failure to exercise due care,
however it be pleaded,
but we are not, um,
we're not cutting across the more general law of, um,
intentional torts.
So I, I should have given an example,
but if you look at section 21,
what that says, if is if you in personal injury damages
That the action that caused the death
or injury was negligence, exemplary damages are gone.
So that the whole discussion in Gray's case has now been
overtaken by Section 21.
If, if the substance of your case, the pleading,
doesn't matter if the substance
of your case is a failure exercise due care
and skill, you cannot get exemplary
damages, but if the substance of your case is an intentional
trespass or assault, of course the Parliament has left
exemplary damages alone, which might be part
of the answer I was gonna give you on Justice speech, James,
that that's part of the divide. Can I,
Can I just ask, just ask very quickly, do you,
do you accept that negligence,
even in a personal injury case,
can arise in two quite different ways?
One way is quite imposition of a duty as a matter of law,
where it's reasonably foreseeable in the circumstances
that a class of that type
of person will suffer physical injury.
And another way is by an assumption of responsibility
where the defendant has assumed responsibility maybe for
that type of injury, maybe for a broader type of injury, um,
to, um, ensure, uh, that care is taken.
I, I don't think I can say yes, your honor,
for the reason the Chief Justice put to me
that under this act
negligence is a faded exercise, reasonable care and skills.
So however you, however you define the entry point,
it's gotta be something that's capable of being breached
by a failure to exercise reasonable care and skill.
But you have to align that with the, the definition
of negligence with section three B
one A one A.
I mean, it's deliberately saying yes,
generally it can't be an intentional act,
but not, not in the case
of child sexual abuse when it can be an intentional act.
You can't ignore
that when looking at the definition of negligence.
So that's what I would like you to think about. Mr. Gleason?
Yes. Can I just, I think you've
Now got it from three judges.
Um, your honors, the, uh, position of the respondents
as the, uh, sorry, position of the respondent is
that if in the event your honors find that, uh,
the respondent did owe the appellate of duty,
whether it's ordinary
or nondelegable, uh, there remain outstanding issues.
And those outstanding issues should be remitted
for finalization in the Court of appeal.
Uh, the first outstanding issue, obviously is
that captured in grounds one and two in the court of appeal,
and that is whether the, um, abuse, uh, occurred.
And if I could just, um, in that respect,
take your honors within the court appeal book
to the manner in which those grounds one
and two were, um, dealt with by, uh,
the Chief Justice, um, and his honor Justice Leming.
Um, if your honors go within the court court appeal book,
um, to paragraph 1 5 4
in the court of appeal judgment, which is, uh, page 1 7 5,
Your honors will see that it was a view of Justice Lehman
that, uh, if called upon to decide,
um, whether the abuse had occurred
or not, that is the Court of appeal had to decide it
or sent the matter back for the trial judge
to decide afresh.
The question would ultimately, uh, turn on what WA was
to be given to Mr.
Uh, Perry's evidence, um, on the one hand
and the appellant's evidence on the other.
That was the question, uh, which his honor envisage would,
would need to be, um, addressed.
Now, that's where his honor, where the matter rested
because, um, the view taken, uh,
by this point in time was that, um, there,
there being a duty owed the question
of whether the abuse occurred did not have
to be decided by the Court of Appeal.
Can I then take your honors back to what, uh,
the Chief Justice did?
I know this has been touched on already,
but just to reiterate, his honors view, uh,
captured particularly, um, in paragraphs 15
and 16, that's a court appeal book
1 2 7 15.
Uh, the Chief Justice identifies that Justice Lemming has,
um, persuasively highlighted significant difficulties
with the trial judge's acceptance
that the assaults had occurred.
And those are, uh, identified in detail by his honor bear.
Then paragraph 16, he's honor as, uh,
justice Beach Jones has already referred
to talks about the success of that challenge.
That's success of the challenge made
by the present respondent in the appeal to the findings
that the sexual assault had occurred And in,
uh, his honors view were not for the decision
that there was no duty of care.
The question, factual questions about whether the abuse
occurred, had occurred at all, um, needed to be resolved.
So we say it's clear from at least, uh,
from these two judges that
that view was taken in the court of appeal.
That is the error had been demonstrated in the fact finding
on the question of whether the abuse had occurred such
that an intervention either by the court itself
or by sending the matter back, uh, was required.
Then if I could take your honors just to some
of the observations made by our learned friend, Mr.
McCamish, and in particular paragraph 137,
Sorry, you said there are some
outstanding issues to be remitted.
Are these some of the outstanding issues?
Are we moving to a different
Topic? These
are some of the outstanding matters to be remitted.
First, the question of whether the
abuse had occurred, thank you.
If the abuse, um, had occurred, uh,
was there relevant breach of the ordinary duty and,
and if there was breach depending on its form, whether was
that breach causative of loss?
Now, if we take your honors then to, uh, where
to paragraph 137 in Justice lemmings judgment court appeal
book 1 6 8, our friends criticize,
um, his honor here by saying
that his honor was wrong in saying in the second sentence
that the plaintiff was not cross-examined on the sexual
assaults when he was recalled at trial.
Can I just give your honors, um, some reference,
and this will also pick up, um, the relevant evidence which,
uh, her honor, the primary judge described as vivid.
Your honors have the, um, appellant book
of further materials
at page 488.
That's, Uh, your honors will recall that the,
the process of taking the evidence was a, a little uneven
because of expedition evidence first taken
on commission before Mr.
Kafu. Um, what we, um,
and this evidence recorded including by video,
what we think is the evidence, which to which
the empathetic vivid was attached
is starts at about page 488,
and that's where I was cross-examining, uh,
the appellant on some of the details of the alleged abuse.
And that continues through to about page 4 9 2
and just perhaps this is
what her honor had in mind when talking about, uh,
an example of, of vivid that page 490
at about line 32 and below, there's some specific detail
or some specific cross-examination about some of the detail
by reference to the evidentiary statement questions asked.
What, what was happening to which the answer was, are you
for real from the appellant?
And that that evidence continues in effect
to the bottom of 4 9 2.
That is the cross-examination
of the appellant about the abuse,
and that all happened on commission recorded by video,
and which understand
or assume that that's
what her honor's describing as the vivid evidence.
Then intervening before Mr.
Sorry, before the appellant is,
is recalled is evidence emerges, emerges from Mr.
Um, Perry
and the, the further hearing which took place before her honor.
If I can just identify, your honor, where that evidence is.
So this was where the opportunity for honor to see
the appellant, um, it's the cross-examination starts
at about still within the same, um,
appellant's further building, sorry,
further materials at page 5, 7, 6.
What, what, what are you seeking to draw from taking
Simply that the cross-examination
on the a on the abuse itself
is almost entirely captured in the evidence on commission,
which was then caught on video, which was then available
for her honor to see,
and then available for the court of appeal to see
the further hearing of, um, involving, um, the,
the plaintiff where her honor got to see him give evidence,
did not have, as its subject matter, the abuse itself,
but rather what had been said by Mr. Perry, it
Did at 5 99 At the very end, in,
in it's simply in a brown
and done series
of ques three questions asked at the very end. Well,
You might say that's a vivid answer,
Well, Just looking black and white on the page.
You know, I was the one that suffered, not him,
no one else pretty I you could call that vivid.
Well, the, the bulk of the evidence given on the question
of the abuse was that catch on camera, which, uh,
and then when, uh, well,
At least you had to be there.
Yes. And then, but what her honor was looking at
and was describing as, as vivid was
with respect from looking at the video, which was
of course then available, um, to the Court of appeal.
In terms of the, um, process though, um,
going back to what the Court of Appeal had to say
and what Justice Lenning had to say at 1 3 8 on page one,
um, six eight, uh, his honor refers to a,
or makes a finding that the account was demonstrably
unreliable, and there's no challenge in this court
by the appellant to his honors finding there.
And then that, uh, has five bases, um,
but continues for the balance of
that paragraph. I mean, they
Don't need to challenge it
because they've got the,
it doesn't overturn the primary judge.
Her finding, well, in, in our respectful submission, the,
the, the error in terms of the fact finding was,
was made out before their honors in the court of appeal,
such that their honor should be given that opportunity
to finish the task which they commenced,
but understand pulled up on.
So you're saying we've got this kind of position
where two judges have set the findings aside
but not made them, and one judge has said no,
the findings were right or affirmed
Them. Two judges
have set aside the, the finding
that the abuse had occurred without them going on
to either send the matter back for a finalization of
that finding or make the finding themselves,
and then the remaining judge himself, uh,
found error.
He doesn't specify what in the fact finding process,
but then goes on to find no ultimate error on the question
of whether the abuse had occurred.
So that's the, the situation we're left in, uh,
and in our, uh, respectful submission that by reference
to the notes of contention, we should be given
that opportunity as it were to have this matter,
this fundamental question of whether the abuse occurred
or not returned to the Court of appeal.
So it can finish that exercise.
And, and there were, um,
before as set out in paragraph 138 sound reasons
for, uh, the finding of, of error on the part
of the trial judge such that this was a real issue
that required determination.
And as I've shown your honors already by reference to 1 5 4,
really that question is by comparing these two
diametrically opposed accounts of events at the presbytery,
uh, on the one hand advanced by the appellant,
and on the other hand, advanced by Mr. Perry,
whose evidence was by
and large accepted even by, uh, justice Ball in his,
his differing view on the factual matters determined
that Mr. Perry was credible and
and fundamental
to the appellant's factual case about the abuse was
that he was alone in the company
of Father Picken at the presbytery.
That that was an essential part
of his case advanced throughout his evidentiary statements
in terms of at least the first evidentiary statement, uh,
accompanied by assertions that there were periods of, uh,
20 minutes or 40 minutes in which Mr. Perry was away from
the presbytery when the abuse occurred, though those are,
uh, serious matters, uh, advanced on behalf of the appellant
to, uh, form a basis for an acceptance of his account
that he was abused, which the court didn't accept,
which the trial judge didn't accept,
and having not accepted it
nonetheless, um, didn't, um, bring that into account
and ultimately determining whether the abuse
had occurred. Mr.
Sheller, are we still leaving Mr. Hertzfeld three
Minutes? Yes. Um,
your Honor, um,
those are all the matters we wanted to say.
We other reli otherwise rely upon our
submissions on the question of breach and
Court. Mr. Shelley, you're the trial,
so you may know on, on my
quick reading of the pleadings in particulars and so forth.
It does look as though there was an acceptance
of the Civil Liability Act restrictions on
damages applied. Is that,
So there, there was on damages,
the trial judge allowed two, two different amounts.
Uh, one was predicated on vicarious liability, so
that can be put to one side.
The other was on no vicarious liability.
The restrictions under the Civil Liability Act were held
to apply because, uh, three
B does not click in
because the diocese is not the perpetrator
of the intentional tort.
So that's how it worked. That, that that was the basis.
Yes, yes. Thank you. Thank you, your Honor. Thank you.
Um, your Honor, I think I should have 18 minutes,
given there was 15 extra minutes,
but I'll try to do it in five.
Um, your Honor, the Chief Justice asked where the language
of church events came from.
It came from the respondent's closing submissions
to the primary Judge c respondent's book
of Further Materials, page 60 at paragraph 48, your Honor,
justice Edelman asked whether it was put in the Court
of appeal that the primary judge's reference
to the Canin report should be understood to be a reference
to the 1987 letter that was accepted by both sides
c respondent's book of further Materials,
page 1 7 2 at lines 34 to 41
and 1 8 9 lines 26 to 35, your Honor,
justice Gordon asked about the facts
that we particularly rely on for Nondelegable duty,
especially as to entrustment.
Can I give your honor, these references in our written
submissions in Chief paragraphs 25 to 29
and 38 to 40 in entrustment in particular is paragraph
29, and in reply, paragraphs 14
to 19 entrustment is dealt with,
particularly at paragraph 17.
In addition, appellant's book of further materials,
volume two pages 5 0 5 to six
in relation to duty of care, there was an attack by Mr.
Gleason on the weight to be given to Father Di, to be given
to Father Dylan's evidence that evidence was unchallenged
and uncontradicted
by any competing evidence from the party best able
to lead it, namely the respondent, either on the question
of the role of a parish priest
or on the knowledge of, uh, bishops
and so on as to the risks of sexual abuse.
Mr. Gleason placed an emphasis on that part
of Father Dylan's report, referring to the power
of a parish priest to have events at the presbytery, quote,
directly part of the church's mission.
But when the whole of his evidence is read, it is explained
how broad that was thought to be really amounting to
that which was decided by the parish priest, uh,
to be suitable, including social activities.
Uh, it is irrelevant that there were some limits placed on
the parish priest's, uh, authority.
If the course of conduct was sufficiently broad to capture,
uh, the kind of task which was at issue, uh, here
relation to reasonable foreseeability.
In principle, it would be sufficient, uh, for a duty of care
and reasonable foreseeability to be tested
by asking simply about personal injury.
That is a kind of harm distinguished, for example,
from economic loss.
But we have, in any event, shown your honors
how sexual assault was reasonably foreseeable, either
because of the knowledge of the diocese
or that which it ought to have known in the circumstances,
and if that's so, the duty of care follows our priority
for other kinds of personal injury not caused
by intentional sexual abuse.
In this case, the breach, of course, was, um, failing
to prevent sexual abuse by the priest,
and that was what the primary judge's findings about
breach, uh, addressed.
Those findings were the correct findings to make.
However, the duty is framed,
because the facts in this case involved sexual assault
in relation to Father Doran, uh,
and in particular his duty to report, uh, a complaint.
I referred you in chief to the passages in O'Connor
and common solely in relation to paragraph 230
of Justice Lehman's reasons.
There was no evidence
before the court that the various people
that he mentioned on the various committees were senior
to parish priests.
The evidence from Father Dylan was
that parish priests in the hierarchy
were directly below the bishop.
Those other committees could have been off to the side.
The fact that there were such committees does not
demonstrate that they were more senior than parish priests.
And again, no evidence from the party one would've thought
best placed to controvert Father Dylan's evidence on
that point if they wish to do so.
In relation to Nondelegable duty, Mr.
Gleason sought to get something out of five Q.
In the other provisions of part one A, um, that doesn't work
for the reason, your Honor, justice Jago pointed out
that those parts are explicitly misapplied
by section three, capital B.
In a case of this kind, it was accepted that
that provision applied c the primary judge's reasons at
paragraph 2, 7 3, you
therefore get nothing out of, uh, those provisions.
We were criticized for our reference to Chasky.
That was a case about, uh, an employer's duty
to ensure the safe system of work.
And in that particular case, the uh, employer failed
to exercise reasonable care to prevent an attack
by, uh, third parties.
We now recognize that duty as a nondelegable one,
and if it were otherwise, an employer who leaves the safety
of their workplace to a contractor
will escape if one employee
while Sky Laking intentionally
and unlawfully injures another, um, in relation
to the Civil Liability Act reforms as a suggestion that, uh,
your Honor should not correct the error in Lapore
as your Honor, justice Bee Jones pointed out, um,
they are not on the same topic as was submitted by Mr.
Gleason. They're on a limited topic
that is child abuse proceedings.
Uh, whereas the holding in Lapore applies to any kind
of nondelegable duty,
and even if it was the case that it was limited
to child abuse proceedings,
there's no in indication in the text of the limit
of the text of the legislation
or the extrinsic material
that Parliament was doing anything other than supplying an
additional remedy to plaintiffs.
Finally, the cross-examination
before the primary judge about the assaults begins at
appellant book, uh, assault Rather.
Yes, the assaults begins at primary,
uh, let me start that again.
I'm trying to do this too quickly. I'm sorry.
The cross-examination
before the primary judge
of the appellant about the assaults begins at appellant's
book of further Materials volume two, page five 80,
and goes all the way through to the page that Your Honor,
justice Jago mentioned.
It was extensive. I think I'm two minutes behind. I'm sorry.
I did my best. Thank you.
I, I, and, and I think, I think Mr.
Gleason wants the last word.
Well, we did ask him a question, which is yet to answer.
I don't want the last word. Um,
there isn't a one line answer to the, to the question.
Mr. Hertzfeld just referred to paragraph 2 7 3,
the primary judge, which says
that at trial you honor Justice Beach Jones.
The parties agreed the damages were assessed at common law
when it was vicarious.
When it was vicarious.
I was wondering what's the position with non eligible and,
and what, what I'd been trying to say in chief was,
if you are running a negligence case,
you're within part one A
and negligence means failure to exercise reasonable care,
and, and then you're under the act.
But it has to be a negligence case.
You, you're running, um,
and I took you to five Q, which
can't be simply disa complied as Mr.
Hertzfeld said. If he's,
if his case is a case in negligence, in, in the tort
of negligence, he's caught by five A and
and five Q applies
and the damages would, would be capped under the act.
Now, um, apparently there's some New South Wales Court
of Appeal Authority, which says that three B so far
as it is directed to the primary offender, uh, calves
that out of the act.
And then the exception brings back in the limited provisions
of six F and six H and six O.
Um, Mr. So that's Mr. Gleason.
I think, uh, I think we need a note from you on this.
I'm sorry. I can't do it better than that, your Honor. Yes.
Can we do that? Uh, how long do you want?
We'll just do it, we'll do it two
days, your Honor, in two days.
Mr. Yes,
We, we'll need an opportunity to respond to this
because it has the quite radical consequence
that I think on the respondent's case.
Now, five Q is in play.
You can put this in writing. Mr.
Herzfeld, how long do you want?
Yes, we will need a week.
This is not a small issue, just relevant
to damages down the track. Well,
Mr. Peon, you put
in your note in two days, and Mr.
Feld, you have a week after
That. Thank you, your Honor.
Thank you. Um,
the court will consider its decision in this matter
and will adjourn until 10:00 AM Next Tuesday in Perth
All Stand, the High Court of Australia stands adjourned
to 10:00 AM on Tuesday, 12 August in Perth.